======================================================================
VERBAL REASONING - CORRIGES DETAILLES DU LIVRE
======================================================================

model for non-therian mammals and their
venom delivery and properties. (Wikipedia)
A.      Although today it is rare for mammals to
have venom, it was once widespread.
B.       The platypus’s venom, while extremely
painful, is not lethal to other animals.
C.      The platypus is the last example of once
common mammals that produce venom.
D.      It cannot be said that the venom of the female
platypus is more painful than the male’s.
150.   The capacity of re-grown areas of the
Amazon rainforest to draw carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere and combat climate
change may have been “vastly overesti-
mated”, scientists fear. The forest is a gigan-
tic carbon sink, drawing the greenhouse gas
from the atmosphere. Cleared areas that are
re-planted are known as secondary forest,
and have been seen as key to fighting cli-
mate change, researchers at Lancaster
University said. But a new study has found
that those areas held just 40 percent as much
carbon dioxide as sequestered by parts of
the Amazon untouched by humans, casting
doubt on their ability to aid in mitigating
the crisis. And at the same time, global
warming appeared to be hampering the re-
growth of secondary forest. Scientists mon-
itored forest regrowth over a period of 20
years and revealed how the Amazon was
affected by periods of drought. During
times of “water deficit”, regrown forests
absorb less carbon from the atmosphere.
(The Independent)
A.      Secondary forests were found to have no
effect in capturing carbon from the atmo-
sphere.
B.       Clearing areas in the Amazon has a lasting
impact even when trees are later replanted.
C.      Rainforests are inherently more effective at
capturing carbon than other forest types.
D.      Forests that go through cycles of replanting
were found less able to absorb carbon.

ANSWERS
1. C
A.      Cannot say. While measles “predisposes chil-
dren to all other infectious diseases for up to
a few years” the passage does not say
whether those who catch measles definitely
will catch other diseases.
B.       Cannot say. The passage suggests that this is
probably the case, but not that it is for certain.
C.      True. The passage says that “studies in mon-
keys have suggested that measles … erases
immune protection to other diseases”.
D.      Cannot say. While the passage only refers to
monkeys, it does not exclude humans, mean-
ing that it could also apply to them.
2. A
A.      True. While an outer protective layer will
protect a cheese, once that is breached, the
inner, untreated cheese will eventually go
bad, even in a refrigerator.
B.       Cannot say. Although the passage mentions
that brie has an outer layer of edible mould, it
does not mention inedible types.
C.      False. Cheddar “is wiped with saline regu-
larly to keep mould from growing on it”.
D.      Cannot say. The passage does not discuss
whether a cheese will remain preserved
indefinitely if the rind is intact.
3. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not state if this
is widely believed or not, only that the name
may suggest it.
B.       False. The passage says that it is usually older
people with other conditions who experience
acute kidney injury, but that means that
younger people do experience it as well, even
if not as frequently.
C.      Cannot say. Without dialysis, kidney shut-
down may lead to death, but as the passage
states, acute kidney injury may also only
result in a minor loss of kidney function,
which would not be fatal.
D.      True. It CAN be said. Acute kidney injury is
when your kidneys suddenly stop working
92
VERBAL REASONING TEST

properly, and this can include a “minor loss”
of kidney function.
4. B
A.      False. Human resources people were used
because their job is to be in tune with other
people.
B.       True. We are told in the passage that psy-
chopaths are “people with dark traits”. The
study of HR personnel found those with dark
traits who were “not lacking the ability to
empathize”, meaning they CAN empathize,
but score low in their inclination to use this
ability.
C.      Cannot say. People who do not actually
empathise may be either able or unable to do
so, and there is no information as to the rela-
tive proportions in the general population.
D.      False. Researchers found that “overwhelm-
ingly” those with the dark triad were not
inclined to behave in an empathetic way.
5. C
A.      Cannot say. There is no comparative assess-
ment of the irrigation skills of the Assyrians
and Egyptians.
B.       False. The Assyrians were affected more seri-
ously by the megadroughts than those fur-
ther downstream because the Tigris in
northern Iraq was “so deeply cut into the sur-
rounding soil” that it prevented large-scale
irrigation.
C.      True. As the passage states, the empire was
built during a time of heavy precipitation and
successful harvests, which when they ceased
spelled the end of the empire. While not
saying that this was a “climatological
anomaly”, it also doesn’t rule it out, thus
making it possibly the case.
D.      Cannot say. We are told that it was “a series
of megadroughts that likely triggered the col-
lapse of the empire” and that “Assyrians
were much more vulnerable to the impacts of
prolonged and severe drought than people
downriver”. However that by itself does not
necessarily mean the empire would not have
fallen when it did if it had been further
downriver. It could, for example, have fallen
to invasion.
6. B
A.      False. The study found the drug did not help
participants get to sleep any faster.
B.       True. The study found that using the drug
was related to longer duration of sleep and
less time spent awake during the night.
C.      Cannot say. The passage does not provide
specifics on whether it was a minority or
majority of participants who felt fatigued the
day after smoking marijuana to help them
sleep.
D.      Cannot say. The passage does not discuss
how effective or ineffective alcohol was as a
sleeping aid.
7. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage simply states that
red wine is better for your microbiome than
other types of alcohol, not that other types
are necessarily good.
B.       Cannot say. Drinking red wine once every
two weeks was enough to observe an effect,
but we are not told if this could be increased
by drinking more frequently.
C.      True. Drinking wine is not enough to be ben-
eficial for gut bacteria, it has to be red wine.
D.      Cannot say. The passage refers to some pos-
sible health benefits of drinking red wine but
does not discuss whether drinking red wine,
regardless of amount or frequency, will
improve your health.
8. B
A.      Cannot say. The study only looked at people
“at or above the 98th percentile of intelli-
gence”, not all those who are “above aver-
age”.
B.       True. According to the passage, “those with a
high intellectual capacity (hyper brain) pos-
sess overexcitabilities in various domains
that may predispose them to certain psycho-
logical disorders”.
C.      Cannot say. The passage refers to highly
intelligent people having higher rates of food
allergies, but does not specifically mention
nuts.
D.      Cannot say. The passage only provides spe-
cific rates for the highly intelligent.
VERBAL REASONING TEST
93

9. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not say if
drawing blood became painless in some
cases, only that it was much less painful
when the person taking the blood was cour-
teous.
B.       True. The study found that “the experience of
pain is much more significantly affected by
the attitude of the people treating you” than
by the number of needle pricks, whose effect
was small.
C.      False. The figure refers to people being 390%
more likely to say their pain was well-con-
trolled, not that the actual pain reduced by
390%.
D.      Cannot say. This is mentioned as one way of
helping to reduce pain levels, but not
whether it is the best way.
10. C
A.      False. The new finding is a new possible
explanation, but the passage does not say
that it negates earlier possible explanations.
B.       Cannot say. This has been suggested as an
explanation, but the passage does not discuss
its likelihood.
C.      True. According to the passage, children born
in the autumn and winter when pregnant
women have higher cortisol rates may have
higher risks for schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder.
D.      Cannot say. Although the passage discusses
the incidence of such disorders in January, it
says only that “these disorders are more
common in people born during the winter
months”, not whether January is the peak
month.
11. B
A.      Cannot say. Although vaping is the single
“most popular and effective way for smokers
to quit” we are not told how many ways
there are, or vaping’s importance as a propor-
tion of these. Nor are we told the relative
importance of people not starting to smoke in
the first place.
B.       True. Although the indoor smoking ban only
prevented smoking inside, the number of
smokers and cigarettes smoked fell subse-
quent to it coming into effect.
C.      False. This can indeed be said, as the average
number of cigarettes smoked per day by
smokers has decreased over time.
D.      Although vaping is increasing rapidly and
cigarette smoking falling, we are not told the
percentage of adults vaping, or indeed if pre-
sent trends will continue.
12. A
A.      True. The study found high rates of dental
problems among athletes despite their brush-
ing twice a day.
B.       False. According to the passage, changes to
saliva may “exacerbate the damage”, but this
is not the prime cause.
C.      Cannot say. There is nothing in the passage
to indicate either way if British athletes had
better or worse oral health than non-British
athletes.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says researchers
believe that to be the case, but it did not say it
has been proven.
13. D
A.      Cannot say. Scientists think this may be the
case but the passage does not say that this is
known for certain.
B.       Cannot say. The passage does not mention
what role, if any, exercise played in the
weight loss.
C.      Cannot say. The research into the effects of
alternate-day fasting was carried out at the
University of Graz but there is nothing in the
passage about who has pioneered the use of
the diet.
D.      True. As the passage states, the reason alter-
nate-day fasting appears to be a healthy
option is because it is close to how humans
ate thousands of years ago.
14. C
A.      False. Email traffic actually increased when
offices switched to an open plan layout.
B.       Cannot say. The study looked at the compar-
ative impact of open-plan and cubicle layouts
on communication, not at the impact on pro-
ductivity.
C.      True. The study found that in open plan
offices, people were less likely to make face to
face contact and found new ways to preserve
their privacy.
94
VERBAL REASONING TEST

D.      Cannot say. The passage does not discuss
cost savings.
15. D
A.      Cannot say. While “the likelihood of some-
one using opioids increases significantly once
a family member living in the same house-
hold has a prescription” we are not told
whether or not the majority of new users come
from such households.
B.       Cannot say. The comparative ease of access
of lower and higher-income households is
not mentioned.
C.      False. It would be right to say it. Because
patients “typically receive more pills than
they need” it creates a temptation for rela-
tives to “experiment with leftovers sitting in
the medicine cabinet”.
D.      True. The study found that the impact could
be measured:  “the chances of a relative
obtaining a prescription for opioids within a
year after a relative they live with gets one
rises by 19 percent to over 100 percent,
depending on family circumstances”.
16. C
A.      Cannot say. The test was conducted on non-
human primates, so whether or not it would
work on humans is not yet known.
B.       False. The passage says that anxiety that
emerges at adolescence may affect people all
their lives, not that it will.
C.      True. According to the passage, the finding
provides hope for new strategies focused on
intervening early in life to treat people at risk
for anxiety disorders.
D.      Cannot say. While stating that current treat-
ments work for only a subset of people and
often only partially relieve symptoms, we
don’t know the size of the subset or what per-
centage “partially” means.
17. A
A.      True. According to the passage, e-cigarette
use may in fact be leading to an increase in
nicotine addiction.
B.       Cannot say. The passage says that the
“prevalence of their use is rapidly growing in
many countries”, but this could be limited to
certain parts of the world.
C.      Cannot say. The passage does not discuss the
social acceptability of e-cigarettes.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says that e-
cigarettes can result in users having “higher
exposure to doses of nicotine compared to
people who smoke traditional cigarettes”,
but the reason given for this is that “e-
cigarettes are used in times and places where
smoking is prohibited”. The comparative
amounts of nicotine in traditional and e-
cigarettes is not mentioned.
18. A
A.      True. According to the passage, people are
more likely to take action in a crisis when
there are few or no other witnesses present.
B.       Cannot say. The passage does not say if the
effect only occurs in certain societies.
C.      False. The more people are around, the less
likely a person is to intervene in a situation,
which means that it is inversely proportional.
D.      Cannot say. While this may seem a plausible
statement, there is nothing in the passage to
indicate its validity.
19. D
A.      Cannot say. While “young people in particu-
lar place higher demands on themselves”,
nothing is said about the effects on older
people.
B.       Cannot say. The passage states that millenni-
als put themselves at risk of mental and phys-
ical illness, but it does not elaborate on their
behaviour.
C.      Cannot say. The passage hints that images in
the media might be an important factor but
does not explicitly evaluate its impact.
D.      True. This is the main theme of the text.
20. C
A.      False. Researchers “found a broad worsening
of mental health indicators, particularly in
the second half of the study period”.
B.       Cannot say. The authors indicate they believe
this to be the case but do not state it as being
for certain.
C.      True. While the passage certainly suggests
that to be the case, nonetheless it does not say
it for certain.
VERBAL REASONING TEST
95

D.      Cannot say. No comparable data is given for
non-students in the same age group.
21. C
A.      Cannot say. According to the passage, they
are the best pet, but there are other animals
not considered pets that might be better.
B.       Cannot say. The passage only mentions dogs
as increasing the sense of well-being, but it
does not state that other animals do not also
have this effect.
C.      True. According to the passage, what seemed
to make dogs have the greatest positive
impact on health is that they require their
owners to be physically active.
D.      False.
According
to
the
passage,
the
researchers did not find that owning a dog by
itself was enough to protect against cardio-
vascular disease.
22. A
A.      True. The passage states that average
Americans trust only 10 to 20 people, and
that that number may be shrinking.
B.       False. According to the passage, a study put
the average person’s friend group at about
121 people. 250 to 5,500 people refers to a
person’s social network size.
C.      Cannot say. Although this was used in the
study, that does not mean it is excellent, only
that it was deemed suitable for the purposes
of the study.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says there is a link
between strong social relationships and
living longer, but it does not say that life
spans have decreased.
23. A
A.      True. The study found that several factors
may make it harder to avoid gaining weight
today than in the past such as exposure to
chemicals, increased use of prescription
drugs and changes in people’s microbiomes.
B.       Cannot say. The passage only says that not
gaining weight is more difficult today than
20-30 years ago, not that losing weight is.
C.      Cannot say. A person of the same age having
the same diet and amount of exercise in 2006
would have a BMI 2.3 points higher than in
1988. However we are not told if on average
people in 2006 ate or exercised more or less
than in 1988, and therefore what BMI was on
average.
D.      Cannot say. The passage mentions these as
possible factors, but only as a hypothesis.
24. B
A.      False. According to the passage, there are
arguments over whether technology is good
or bad for children’s development.
B.       True. The study found that as children use
more smart devices and televisions, their
imaginations have suffered.
C.      False. The passage said “almost” two-thirds,
not more than two-thirds.
D.      False. The “fewer than half” refers to the per-
centage of nursery workers who said that the
children at their nursery had imaginary
friends.
25. A
A.      True. The survey was in 2017 and the oil spill
was in 2010 and the survey found “an abun-
dance of … the Atlantic deep-sea red crab”.
B.       Cannot say. The passage says there has been
an increase in numbers since a survey two
months after the spill, but does not indicate
how this compares to numbers before the spill.
C.      Cannot say. Although saying the oil spill
damaged the area, the passage does not say if
it was irreversibly changed or not.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says that there has
been a change, but it does not say if this is
permanent or only temporary.
26. B
A.      False. Fires are part of the life cycles for cer-
tain types of forests, but not for all of them,
such as rainforests.
B.       True. In certain situations, preventing small
fires from occurring means that fuel for a fire
accumulates so that when one does occur, it
is much worse than it would be otherwise.
C.      False. Intense fires are sometimes necessary
to consume old and diseased trees, create
new habitats, and ensure an ecological reju-
venation of the tree population.
D.      Cannot say. While this might seem a possible
explanation, the passage does not mention it.
96
VERBAL REASONING TEST

27. C
A.      Cannot say. Researchers found people
showed “greater goal commitment” when
they shared their goals with someone they
believed had higher status. We are not told
whether or not they got better advice.
B.       Cannot say. The passage does not elaborate
on the rates of goal attainment by those who
do not share them.
C.      True. According to the passage, people do
not want perceived superiors to think less of
them, which was their motivation for attain-
ing a goal after they revealed it to someone
with higher status.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says that the opin-
ions of those with a lower status were not
beneficial for pushing people to achieve a
goal, but not whether the opinions of those
with a lower status matter or not.
28. D
A.      False. According to the passage, panic attacks
can come on for no apparent reason.
B.       Cannot say. The highest frequency the pas-
sage mentions is several panic attacks a week,
but it does not say that they cannot happen
more frequently.
C.      Cannot say. While saying some panic attacks
have been reported to last up to an hour, it
does not say that they cannot last longer.
D.      True. As the passage states, most of the
symptoms of a panic attack can also be symp-
toms of other conditions or problems.
29. A
A.      True. The U.S. military found that 90 percent
of expired medications were still sufficiently
effective several years after their expiry date.
B.       Cannot say. While a medicine used within its
shelf life “will work to its maximum potency
and safety”, there is no indication whether it
is the subsequent reduction of potency or of
safety that is the more significant risk.
C.      False. The passage tells us that “most of them
are not toxic when expired”, meaning that
some of them are.
D.      Cannot say. While the U.S. military study
found that to be the case for the over 100
medicines they tested, that does not mean it
applies to ALL medicines.
30. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage compares the
chances of reaching 85 of the most optimistic
and the least optimistic women, and those of
the most optimistic and the least optimistic
men. It does not make a comparison between
men and women.
 B.      Cannot say. While this may be the case, the
passage does not declare one study to be
more accurate than the other.
C.      False. The studies controlled for health condi-
tions and behaviours so that these would not
impact the results.
D.      True. The most optimistic women lived
14.9% longer than their peers, while men
only lived 10.9% longer.
31. A
A.      True. As the passage says, people experienc-
ing impostor syndrome incorrectly attribute
their success to luck or as deceiving others.
B.       Cannot say. The passage states that early
research focused on women, but does not say
that men were believed not to be affected by
impostor syndrome.
C.      False. Impostor syndrome is described as a
“psychological pattern”, not a mental illness.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says that people
with
impostor
syndrome
“incorrectly
attribute their success to luck”, but does not
refer to how people who actually did achieve
their success through luck will feel.
32. C
A.      False. The passage says it tends to run in fam-
ilies, which means that it is not always the
case.
B.       False. The passage says that it is often the
case, which also means that it is not always
the case.
C.      True. The signs of an impending psychotic
break are often dismissed as symptoms of
typical adolescent behaviour.
D.      Cannot say. There is no information in the
text as to whether a psychotic break can be
prevented if its warning signs are recognised
in time.
33. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage tells us that 11 per-
VERBAL REASONING TEST
97

cent of youngsters whose mothers suffered
anxiety have ADHD symptoms, compared
with 5 percent of all youngsters. However we
are not told what proportion of ALL mothers
suffer anxiety. It could be that most children
with ADHD are actually born to mothers
who do not suffer anxiety.
B.       Cannot say. Scientists believe this may be the
case, but say they are not certain.
C.      True. The study found that the rate for
ADHD among children was 11% for those
with anxious mothers, and only 5% for those
without.
D.      Cannot say. The passage specifically refers to
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, not
Attention Deficit Disorder, which is not men-
tioned.
34. C
A.      Cannot say. While the passage states that
alcohol consumption has declined by 0.8%
since 2017, it does not directly attribute this to
increased legal marijuana sales.  Other factors
could be involved.
B.       Cannot say. The IWSR warns that companies
will need to begin anticipating shifting
demands, but we are not told if they have so
far “proved reluctant” to do so.
C.      True. The passage tells us both these facts.
D.      Cannot say. Up to 40% of adults consume
cannabis in states where it is legal but we are
not told the proportion who consume alco-
hol.
35. D
A.      Cannot say. Although we are told South
Korean imports of Japanese beer have
plunged 97%, making this seem a likely con-
clusion, the text gives us no information
about the scale of imports of Japanese beer by
other countries.
B.       Cannot say. The passage suggests it is simply
a case of South Koreans not buying Japanese
beers in protest, but there is nothing said
about tariffs.
C.      Cannot say. Although the passage mentions a
South Korean brewer as benefiting, we are
not told whether an aim of the boycott was to
increase consumption of South Korean, as
opposed to any other non-Japanese, beers.
D.      True. With a drop of 97% in August from a
year earlier, it is perfectly reasonable to
believe that Japanese beer “may no longer”
have the largest share of the South Korean
beer import market, even if we are not defini-
tively told as much.
36. A
A.      True. Almost 75 percent of earthquakes occur
along tectonic plate boundaries.
B.       Cannot say. As 75 percent of earthquakes
occur along tectonic plate boundaries, 25 per-
cent must occur elsewhere. However that
does not necessarily mean they can occur
anywhere.
C.      Cannot say. The passage mentions Southern
California experiencing earthquakes almost
every three minutes, but does not say any-
thing about whether earthquakes occur in
South Carolina.
D.      Cannot say. We are told that “there is a 100-
percent chance that an earthquake will strike
somewhere in the world each day” and that
almost 75 percent of earthquakes occur along
tectonic plates. However that does not rule
out the possibility of there being days on
which earthquakes are experienced only in
areas NOT on the tectonic plates.
37. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage tells us that the
Earth’s elliptical orbit can cause warming,
but does not refer to it as a factor in current
global warming.
B.       True.
Scientists
have
found
that
the
Palaeocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum was
caused by an eccentricity in the Earth’s orbit
around the sun.
C.      False. The Earth’s orbit around the sun goes
through cycles where it is more circular or
more elliptical.
D.      Cannot say. During the past 100 million
years, the Earth was at its hottest 56 million
years ago, but it may have been hotter before
that.
38. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not state
whether Samsung doubled its market share
or not, only that it ended the quarter with
twice the market share of its nearest competi-
tor.
B.       Cannot say. While we are told that Samsung
98
VERBAL REASONING TEST

offers smartphones that are indeed “compa-
rable” there is no mention of what they cost
to buy.
C.      True.  While “the overall smartphone market
in CEE remained flat” Samsung achieved a
40% market share, which was twice that of
Huawei, its nearest competitor, meaning that
it is the largest player in the market.
D.      Cannot say. While the passage tells us that
the refreshed A-series was Samsung’s “star
performer”, other factors such as the US
trade embargo, marketing or pricing could
also have produced such growth.
39. A
A.      True. In the summer there is “a wide blend of
scent”, while when it is cooler and drier “spe-
cific scents tend to stand out more”.
B.       False. Scents are easier to pick out because
there are not as many of them as in the
summer.
C.      Cannot say. The passage says hot and muggy
air enables scent molecules to move through
the atmosphere more quickly. However the
question refers only to the heat of the air, not
whether it is also muggy. Since we are not
told how scent travels in hot but dry condi-
tions, we cannot say for sure.
D.      Cannot say. The relative importance of tem-
perature and humidity are not discussed.
40. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage describes the spot-
light effect as something everyone experi-
ences, and does not discuss how it varies
between different types of people.
B.       True. Our “tendency to anchor other people’s
viewpoints to our own”, and not accurately
consider what someone else’s perspective
might be, is the root cause of the spotlight
effect.
C.      False. The spotlight effect is “something that
we all experience frequently in our everyday
life”.
D.      False. The reason we experience the spotlight
effect is because we tend not to consider other
perspectives, not that we cannot.
41. D
A.      Cannot say. Planets that “stray too close”
may be swallowed, but we are not told for
certain if that applies to any planets that are
simply “close” when the star expands as it
ages.
B.       Cannot say. The passage says that it can
make a star grow brighter, but does not state
either way if it can make the star grow larger.
C.      False. This situation may cause the star to
spin too quickly, but it is not certain to.
D.      True. As the passage makes clear, this can
certainly have detrimental effects for the star,
such as causing it to rip itself apart.
42. B
A.      Cannot say. We are told that “hundreds of
small independent restaurants had collapsed
as well as big chains”, so we do not know
whether overall customers turned away from
chains to independents or vice-versa.
B.       True. According to the passage, this market
segment is oversaturated and there is simply
more supply than demand.
C.      Cannot say. We are told that “tightened con-
sumer spending on the back of concerns
about Brexit” and “rising costs because of the
collapse value in the value of the pound” are
said to be factors in the insolvencies, but no
direct link is suggested between the concerns
about Brexit and the value of the pound.
D.      Cannot say. The passage tells us that 1,412
restaurants became insolvent in the year to
the end of June 2019 and that “hundreds” of
small independent restaurants had collapsed.
However without more exact figures we
cannot determine if “hundreds” represented
a majority or minority of the restaurants that
closed.
43. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage merely states that
Europeans put greater emphasis on “less
energy-intensive forms of cooling”. This
could be for other reasons, such as cost.
B.       Cannot say. Japan has the highest rate men-
tioned in the text, but there could be other
countries with higher adoption rates.
C.      True. Only 20% of European households
have air conditioning, but increased global
sales will be driven mostly by sales in devel-
oping countries.
D.      False. According to the passage, increased
European air conditioning system sales will
be driven by more people moving to cities.
VERBAL REASONING TEST
99

44. C
A.      False. Inflation increased in twelve Member
States.
B.       Cannot say. The passage discusses two dif-
ferent sets of inflation rates, one for the whole
of the EU and the other just for the euro area.
The statement is true in respect of the annual
euro area inflation rate, but we are not told
whether this was also true of the inflation
rate for the EU as a whole.
C.      True. Portugal had a negative annual infla-
tion rate of -0.1% during the period observed.
D.      False. Inflation within the euro area was 1.0%
exactly, and not over it.
45. B
A.      False. Euro area production in construction in
July 2019 was 1.1% higher than in July 2018.
Month-on-month, meaning comparing with
June 2019, it decreased by 0.7%.
B.       True. “In June 2019, production in construc-
tion increased by 0.6% in the euro area and
by 0.1% in the EU28.” It follows therefore that
production
in
construction
must
have
increased by less, or most likely decreased, in
the non-euro countries.
C.      Cannot say. The passage only says Hungary
saw the largest percentage increase in con-
struction, not construction outright.
D.      Cannot say. France, Slovakia and Poland are
the only three countries for which data was
available that saw decreases, but that does not
rule out the possibility that other countries
also had decreases.
46. C
A.      Cannot say. According to the passage, its
speed means that the comet “likely origi-
nated” outside our solar system, meaning
that it is probable but not certain.
B.       Cannot say. The passage says that such
comets “could be more common than
thought”, but not that they definitely are.
C.      True. Astronomers said that speed of the
comet was so fast that it likely originated
from outside our solar system.
D.      Cannot say. The passage implies that comets
from our own solar system are slower than
those with an interstellar origin, but it does
not say that they ONLY travel at slower
speeds.
47. D
A.      False. Aperture only partially determines
this, in combination with shutter speed.
B.       False. As the passage states, the smaller the
aperture, the larger the f-number, meaning it
is inversely proportional.
C.      Cannot say. The effects of these particular
combinations of aperture size and shutter
speed are not discussed.
D.      True. Aperture is what determines the depth
of field of an image, or how much of the
image is in focus.
48. A
A.      True. Scientists “predict” this, but that does
not mean it is known for certain.
B.       Cannot say. Scientists “are still not sure
whether climate change will lead to an
increase or decrease in their frequency”.
C.      Cannot say. Although “climate change is
expected to lead to a rise in hurricane rain-
fall”, there is nothing in the text to indicate
that this is already occurring.
D.      False. Scientists believe the rise in global sea
levels will lead to coastal storms being more
destructive due to increased risks from storm
surges, but not from more intense hurricanes.
49. D.
A.      False. ISO is ONE of the settings, along with
aperture and shutter speed, that determines
the brightness of a photograph.
B.       Cannot say. The passage states that as a pos-
sibility, not a certainty.
C.      False. ISO is in fact what determines a camera
sensor’s sensitivity to light.
D.      True. As the passage states, “a photo taken at
too high of an ISO will show a lot of grain,
also known as noise, and might not be
usable”.
50. B
A.      False. We are told that Capsicum plant seeds
“are dispersed predominantly by birds”,
which means that seeds are also dispersed in
other ways or by other animals.
B.       True. Mammals have molar teeth which
destroy the seeds, thus preventing them from
germinating, while birds simply pass the
100
VERBAL REASONING TEST

seeds
through
their
digestive
tracts
unharmed.
C.      Cannot say. It is only a theory that natural
selection “may have led” to increased cap-
saicin production. It does not mean that it
definitely did.
D.      Cannot say. The passage only mentions birds
and mammals, and does not refer to reptiles,
for example.
51. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage merely states that
occupational asthma can cause a range of ill-
nesses, not that it is a leading cause of them.
B.       True. As the passage states, although occupa-
tional asthma can result from “exposure to a
substance you're sensitive to”, it can also
result from exposure to “an irritating toxic
substance”.
C.      False. Those with family histories are “more
likely” to develop occupational asthmas,
which means that some people who develop
it do NOT have a genetic predisposition.
D.      Cannot say. While it may well be the case
that some jobs are far more likely to cause
occupational asthma than others, the passage
does not state that it ONLY affects people in
certain lines of work.
52. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not reveal how
Merseyside voted in the referendum.
B.       Cannot say. The passage does not discuss the
avoidance of tabloid media as a whole, or
how well informed people were.
C.      Cannot say. While a “substitution effect” par-
ticularly benefitted rival tabloid the Daily
Mirror, we do not know if this was the “most
popular choice” of former Sun readers. Many
may simply have stopped reading ANY
newspaper.
D.      True. The report says the boycott of a
Eurosceptic newspaper for an entirely unre-
lated reason “cut Euroscepticism in the
county by more than ten percent”.
53. D
A.      Cannot say. While it can be said based on the
passage that it is possible that they are
hungry, we cannot say if it is probable.
B.       Cannot say.  Benjamin Vincent said that “it is
important that people know that being
hungry can affect their preferences”, because
of the “danger” of them making decisions
that entrench their poverty. However while
this is a danger it does not mean it will
always happen.
C.      Cannot say. The passage never discusses why
people end up in poverty, only that going
hungry may negatively impact their ability to
escape it.
D.      True. The scientists found that “hunger can
… lead to impatience”.
54. C
A.      Cannot say. We are only given comparative
data for two medical conditions, stroke and
heart disease, and in any case only compar-
ing vegetarians with meat-eaters.
B.       Cannot say. This might seem a perfectly logi-
cal inference, given that vegetarians have a
lower risk of heart disease than meat-eaters.
But the risk of heart disease faced by vegans
is not mentioned, and there could be addi-
tional factors, such as missing elements in the
vegan diet, that make heart disease more
likely, not less.
C.      True. Vegetarian diets are associated with a
20 percent higher risk of stroke, a serious
medical condition, than that seen in meat-
eaters.
D.      Cannot say. Vegetarians have a lower risk of
heart disease than meat-eaters, but while this
“could be explained by vegetarians generally
having lower cholesterol levels” this is not
given as a definite case of cause and effect.
55. A
A.      True. Although the passage does not tell us
by how much, the amount paid out in claims
means less has been saved from suspending
repairs than initially would have been the
case.
B.       Cannot say. While likely the case, it could
also be that people are now more proficient at
filing claims or simply file more of them.
C.      Cannot say. We are told that 571 claims were
made in 2018 and that the number of success-
ful claims in 2018 was “more than four times
the 68 on which TfL paid out in 2017”.  Four
times 68 is 272, which is indeed less than half
the total of 571 claims. However, because the
number of successful claims was “more than”
four times 68, we cannot be sure that the
VERBAL REASONING TEST
101

actual number of successful claims was less
than half of the total of 571 claims.
D.      Cannot say. We are told that £1.7 million has
been paid to cyclists over the past 5 years, of
which almost £350,000 was in 2018. This
means that at least £1,350,000 was paid in the
other 4 years combined. This could have been
paid out evenly, meaning no other year
exceeded £350,000 (the average of £1,350,000
over 4 years being only £337,500), but it is
also possible that the 2018 figure of £350,000
could have been exceeded previously.
56. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage says the unemploy-
ment rate is the lowest in the EU28 since the
start of the EU monthly unemployment series
in January 2000, but the statement does not
exclude lower rates prior to that.
B.       True. While we are not given specific figures
for the non-euro area, since the euro area is
performing worse than the EU as a whole, it
follows that the non-euro area is outperform-
ing the euro area.
C.      Cannot say. The passage only says the unem-
ployment rate was the lowest recorded since
records began in 2000, not that the number of
people unemployed was the lowest. If the work-
force has grown since 2000, it is possible that
the unemployment rate could have gone
down while the number of unemployed went
up.
D.      Cannot say. The passage does not break
down the number of unemployed men or
women, only providing a combined total.
57. B
A.      Cannot say. Russia was previously consid-
ered “one of” the heaviest-drinking coun-
tries, but that does not necessarily mean it
was THE heaviest-drinking country.
B.       True. According to the WHO, alcohol con-
sumption has long been recognised as one of
the main driving factors of mortality in the
Russian Federation, especially among men of
working age.
C.      False. While Russian consumption has gone
down, it is not 43% of what it was in 2003, but
43% less, meaning that it is still more than
half the previous figure.
D.      Cannot say. While probably true, the passage
never says this.
58. A
A.      True. Two-thirds of the patients showed a
marked reduction in microbial diversity at
some stage during their stay.
B.       Cannot say. While long-term effects could
exist after a person has been discharged, that
is not equivalent to saying they will be
“worse off” than before they were admitted.
Patients will have been admitted for treat-
ment of some other condition.
C.      Cannot say. The passage tells us that two-
thirds “showed a marked reduction in micro-
bial diversity at some stage during their
stay”. This does not exclude the possibility of
some patients leaving only after their micro-
bial diversity was back to normal.
D.      Cannot say. Although “heavy use of broad-
spectrum antibiotics” is something that could
contribute to reduced microbial diversity in
the gut, that does not necessarily mean that
ANY use of antibiotics would inevitably have
the same effect.
59. D
A.      Cannot say. This is what UBS estimates could
happen, but we are not told what Airbus and
Boeing expect.
B.       Cannot say. Although 24% of US travellers
said they would change their flying habits
due to environmental concerns compared to
16% of British respondents, this measures
willingness to change flying habits, not con-
cern for the environment. Other factors might
be involved: for example, American respon-
dents might more easily be able to substitute
other forms of travel.
C.      Cannot say. Without the figures for French
and German respondents, we cannot say if
this is the case or not.
D.      True. UBS, which we are told is a Swiss bank,
expects flights in the EU to increase by only
1.5% per year, while Airbus, which we are
told is a plane maker, forecast a more opti-
mistic rate double that.
60. B
A.      Cannot say. We are told only that neutrinos
are “the lightest of all the known subatomic
particles”.
B.       True. Scientists have only been able to mea-
sure the upper limit of their mass, but not the
lower limit.
102
VERBAL REASONING TEST

C.      Cannot say. While neutrinos are “among the
most abundant particles in the Universe”, we
are also told that they are the lightest of the
known subatomic particles, so we cannot
deduce if they make up most of the uni-
verse’s mass.
D.      False. Neutrinos are difficult to measure
because they tend to cross matter undetected.
61. A
A.      True. Although not definitely stating this as a
fact, the passage suggests that dining choices
may have been influenced by the relative
prices of vegetarian and non-vegetarian
options. This means that price “may” have
been a factor.
B.       Cannot say. The passage does not provide
information on the taste of the meals, only
their quantity.
C.      Cannot say. This is a possibility, the passage
states, but not one that is for certain.
D.      False. Sales of vegetarian meals rose 40–80%.
62. A
A.      True. As the passage states, in all countries,
the information provided by demographers
is key to meeting the population’s present
and future needs.
B.       False. Demographers predict how popula-
tions are likely to change; this does not mean
they necessarily know how they will.
C.      Cannot say. The passage doesn’t say what
percentage of people working as demogra-
phers actually have a degree in demography,
so we cannot say.
D.      False. According to the passage, demogra-
phers analyse data that has been assembled
by national statistical offices.
63. A
A.      True. According to Professor Newman, some
people with anxiety may stay anxious and
avoid relaxation to prevent a later larger shift
in anxiety.
B.       False. It is better to experience shifts in stress
levels and to allow yourself to be relaxed at
times.
C.      Cannot say. The passage says that mindful-
ness training and other interventions can help
people let go and live in the moment. What
sort of intervention is best is not stated.
D.      False. The text tells us that “it’s actually
healthier to let yourself experience those
shifts”.
64. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage mentions govern-
ment corruption but not how democratic or
undemocratic a country is.
B.       Cannot say. While GDP becomes extremely
volatile because of over-dependence on the
price of commodities, we are not told
whether the price is primarily affected by
fluctuations in demand or other factors such
as fluctuations in output from the country’s
mines.
C.      True. As the passage states, when a country
focuses on a single industry, its overall gross
domestic product becomes volatile, which
means that the price of the resource being
focused on is not stable. Since the price of the
resource on which the country has become
over-reliant is not stable, the country is now
exposed to price fluctuations.
D.      Cannot say. The passage does not elaborate
on this either way, although of course it may
play a role.
65. A
A.      True. In its more deadly form, Q fever can
damage your brain but many people with the
milder form have no symptoms at all, there-
fore are unaware they have it.
B.       Cannot say. The passage does not provide
information on when chicken pox is danger-
ous or not.
C.      False. The passage says that “if Q fever
recurs, you may need to take antibiotics for at
least 18 months”.
D.      Cannot say. Q fever is transmitted to humans
by animals, “most commonly sheep, goats
and cattle”, but we are not told which of
these is the most likely to pass it on.
66. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage only discusses its
use by photographers in general terms, with-
out reference to their experience.
B.       False. Since it is a manual override of an auto-
matic feature, it can also be used when a pho-
tographer wants a photo to be lighter or
VERBAL REASONING TEST
103

darker than the camera’s meter would other-
wise allow.
C.      False. As the passage states, camera meters
can usually be relied on, except in challeng-
ing lighting conditions.
D.      True. Exposure compensation allows a pho-
tographer to manually determine how bright,
or how dark, a photograph will be.
67. C
A.      Cannot say. Although we are told it has a
younger surface than Mercury or Mars that
does not rule out other planets being
younger.
B.       Cannot say. The passage only states that the
surfaces of Mars, Mercury and the Moon are
much younger than the surface of Venus, and
does not provide information on the age of
the planet itself.
C.      True. Since scientists do not know if Venus
had plate tectonics to begin with, they also
cannot know if the vaporising of the planet’s
water stopped plate tectonics or not.
D.      False. The Sun did not vaporise Venus,
merely the surface water on the planet.
68. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage says this is the
lowest level recorded by this two-yearly
survey, so there could have been lower levels
in intervening years.
B.       True. According to the passage, 16 percent of
boys had smoked, compared to 17 percent of
girls, therefore it CAN be said that boys were
more likely to have smoked than girls.
C.      Cannot say. The only information provided
on the use of e-cigarettes is that the number
who said they had used e-cigarettes had
remained stable.
D.      Cannot say. The highest proportion of smok-
ers recorded by this survey was 49 percent, in
1996, which would have been just short of a
majority. However there is no information as
to whether a majority of children smoked at
any time before 1996.
69. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage only states that del-
icate cycles released more microplastics than
standard cycles, not that they destroyed
clothes (that is made them unwearable) more
often.
B.       Cannot say. The passage says nothing on this
topic.
C.      True. Contrary to expectations, delicate wash
cycles released more plastic fibres into the
environment than standard cycles.
D.      False. As the passage states, the volume of
water appears to be the most important factor
in dislodging fibres from clothing.
70. D
A.      Cannot say. Scientists suggest this may be the
case, not that it is established for certain.
B.       False. According to the passage, “the ears of
Neanderthals were comparable to those of
human children”.  However they did not
change with age, as children’s ears do.
C.      Cannot say. The passage does not discuss the
issue of failing to evolve and there may have
been other factors involved in their extinc-
tion.
D.      True. Scientists found that Neanderthal ears
were similar to children’s ears, making them
more susceptible to ear infections and com-
plications.
71. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not mention
sea breezes specifically, only proximity to the
coast, so it could be something else that is
actually beneficial.
B.       Cannot say. The passage tells us that “mental
health disorders … are far more likely in
people from poorer backgrounds”. However
it also tells us that proximity to the coast is
linked to better mental health among the
poor. It is possible, therefore, that this specific
group among the poor have better mental
health than richer people inland.
C.      False. The passage specifically mentions
access to blue spaces, not green spaces.
D.      True. While it is quite possibly the case that
proximity to the coast is also good for the
mental health of richer people, nonetheless
the passage only states this for those in the
lowest earning households.
72. B
A.      False. The Sahm Rule is a rule for interpreting
104
VERBAL REASONING TEST

the unemployment statistics, not itself a
statistic.
B.       True. Claudia Sahm invented it to flag
oncoming recessions and the rule aims to be
more dependable than metrics the financial
market currently uses.
C.      Cannot say. The passage says that the Sahm
Rule is intended to be more dependable, but
that does not necessarily mean that it is.
D.      Cannot say. Sahm herself argues in favour of
this, but there is no indication of whether it
will actually happen.
73. A
A.      True. The percentage of road accidents in
Germany caused by truck drivers who fell
asleep was between 30-50%, or less than a
majority.
B.       False. Accidents “caused by truck drivers
who fall asleep momentarily at the wheel …
are the most serious accidents”.
C.      Cannot say. The passage tells us that being
overweight can lead to sleep-related breath-
ing problems. However, that does not mean
that having sleeping problems means that a
person is likely to be overweight. There could
be many other reasons for sleep problems.
D.      False. According to the passage, “deadly acci-
dents due to sleep deprivation happen quite
frequently — perhaps twice as often as acci-
dents as a result of drunk driving”.
74. C
A.      Cannot say. While “non-flushers” can have
up to eight drinks a week without increasing
their risk of high blood pressure, we are not
told whether drinking more than this can
have other types of health risk.
B.       Cannot say. The study did not include
women, so there is nothing said on this topic.
C.      True. According to the passage, excess
amounts of acetaldehyde may cause both
facial flushing and high blood pressure, and
since “flushers” were found to be at greater
risk of high blood pressure, acetaldehyde
may be the culprit.
D.      Cannot say. The passage only says this could
be the case, not that it is, and that “a causal
relationship
between
the
two
remains
unproven”.
75. B
A.      False. More recent data suggests only that
this is “likely” to be the case, not that it is
known for certain.
B.       True. As the passage states, they are hypo-
thetical but scientifically realistic, and it men-
tions the storms that affected in California in
1861-1862.
C.      False. The passage says a quarter of
California’s homes could be affected, mean-
ing that three-quarters would not. Thus we
can conclude that most of California would
NOT be underwater.
D.      Cannot say. The passage gives no informa-
tion on the factors that can cause such storms
or whether or not they are more or less likely
in Arizona or California.
76. B
A.      False. The passage says the slowest walkers,
not all slow walkers, tended to have indica-
tors for neurodegenerative and psychiatric
disorders, and having an indicator for a dis-
ease is in any case not the same as actually
having it.
B.       True. Doctors found that slower walkers
were aging faster.
C.      Cannot say. The passage discusses the
middle-aged and elderly, but does not men-
tion children.
D.      Cannot say. Slow walkers in their 70s and 80s
tend to die sooner, which is not the same as
saying that they always do.
77. D
A.      False. According to the passage, people use
them because they’re so convenient, even
though “we know that Facebook and Google
know too much about us” .
B.       Cannot say. The passage presents this opin-
ion, but follows it up with a contradictory
one.
C.      Cannot say. This is what people who find
such services useful and benign think about
the sceptics, but that does not mean they are.
D.      True. As the passage states, voice assistants
are “unusually polarising”.
78.  D
A.      Cannot say. While saying it is most common
VERBAL REASONING TEST
105

for those in their 70s and 80s, the passage also
says it can affect people of all ages.
B.       False. Loss of peripheral vision is the first
sign of glaucoma, when it can still be treated.
C.      False. Fluid build-up in the front part of the
eye is USUALLY the cause, not just occasion-
ally.
D.      True. Because it tends to develop slowly over
many years, i.e. gradually, many people do
not realise that they have it.
79. A
A.      True. By overworking the muscles on the
right-hand side of the heart, they weaken,
and this can lead to heart failure.
B.       Cannot say. It “can affect people of all ages”
but the passage does not reveal if certain age
groups are more affected by it or not.
C.      Cannot say. The passage tells us that pul-
monary hypertension is “a rare condition”
and that it is “more common in people who
have another heart or lung condition”.
However that does not necessarily mean that
it is rare among those who have pulmonary
hypertension for someone to be without
other conditions.
D.      False. Pulmonary hypertension ONLY affects
the right side of the heart.
80. B
A.      Cannot say. The findings are based on exer-
cising for 30 minutes four times a week.
While this is the same amount of exercise as
20 minutes six times a week, we do not know
if the frequency or the length of each session
could also be relevant factors.
B.       True. Researchers said it may be effective, but
that more research needs to be done in a
larger trial.
C.      Cannot say. We are told what the research
found about the regularity of exercise, not its
intensity.
D.      False. Doctors do in fact think that exercise
may well be a useful treatment, even if not a
cure, for early Alzheimer’s: “the findings
suggest that aerobic workouts can at least
slow down the effects of the disease if inter-
vention occurs in the early stages”.
81. A
A.      True. The passage tells us that shorter or
“blue” wavelengths are scattered by the
atmosphere unlike longer wavelengths.
B.       Cannot say. The passage only mentions how
the scattering of light waves affects the
moon’s apparent colour, not its apparent
size.
C.      False. The light reaching us scatters less when
the moon is overhead, thus its appearance is
distorted less.
D.      Cannot say. There is no information pro-
vided on how shorter or longer light waves
affect how large the moon looks.
82. B
A.      False. Scientists did not see water droplets,
but rather that light was being filtered in a
way that would be caused by water vapour
condensing into liquid water.
B.       True. K2-18 b is a distant planet and
astronomers “have spotted hints of water
raining in the atmosphere”. There is no indi-
cation of how much rainwater there might be,
so it is possible there could be more than on
Earth.
C.      Cannot say. The passage only says having
water in the atmosphere does not necessarily
mean it also has life, and does not say if it is
likely or unlikely.
D.      Cannot say. The passage does not state if
planet size is important for having water in
the atmosphere.
83. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage discusses the bene-
ficial effects of taking vacations, but does not
say whether or not an annual vacation would
be sufficient.
B.       False. As the study noted, a woman’s chances
of having a heart attack when not taking
vacations went up 50%, compared to only
30% for men.
C.      Cannot say. While the study took into
account health factors such as diabetes,
cigarette smoking, income levels and obesity,
it is not mentioned if exercise was also con-
trolled for, so we cannot say.
D.      True. Not taking vacations affected women
more than it did men.
84. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not mention if
106
VERBAL REASONING TEST

Asian typhoons or American tropical storms
are stronger than the other.
B.       False. The storms have become 50% stronger,
which is 1.5 times their previous strength, not
half as strong.
C.      Cannot say. The passage does not provide a
rate for how much stronger the storms hitting
America have become, so we cannot say.
D.      True. According to the passage, climate
change makes SOME weather events more
severe, which also means that it is not the
case for ALL weather events.
85. A
A.      True. According to the passage, even smok-
ing five cigarettes a day is two-thirds as bad
for lung damage as smoking 30 a day, mean-
ing that cutting down from 30 to 15 won’t
make a big difference.
B.       False. Light smoking caused two-thirds of the
damage of heavy smoking.
C.      Cannot say. The passage says that reducing
daily cigarette use “can be an important step
toward quitting entirely”, but not that people
who cut back first are more likely to quit
entirely than those who don’t.
D.      False. Because cutting back can be an impor-
tant step towards quitting entirely, it can still
have significant health benefits.
86. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage says they have their
“shortcomings”, but that can mean anything
from being bad to being good but just need-
ing some improvement.
B.       Cannot say. The passage does not make clear
if this is usually the case or if it only occurs
within a minority of journals.
C.      False. Coercive citations occur when an
editor asks for more citations to their own jour-
nal, but not when they simply ask for cita-
tions to improve a paper.
D.      True. As the passage makes clear, in some
cases an article may only be published if it
includes unnecessary citations referring back
to the journal it is being published in.
87. C
A.      False. The study “opens the door” tor new
treatments for joint injuries, but did not itself
produce new treatments.
B.       Cannot say. While the study has opened the
door to new treatments for repairing joint
injuries, at best it can be said that it has made
human limb generation perhaps more possi-
ble, which itself is far from certain.
C.      True. As the passage states, children can
regenerate their fingertips when treated cor-
rectly.
D.      False. The process is similar, but not the
same.
88. B
A.      False. While the trait is “associated with
holding left-wing views”, that does not rule
out that some hold other views.
B.       True. Politicians who showed an openness to
experience, “a trait related to greater curios-
ity and imagination” were found to be less
likely to win.
C.      Cannot say. This is raised as a possibility, but
it is not stated for certain.
D.      Cannot say. Openness to experience is just
one of many factors in deciding any individ-
ual outcome, so we cannot say if it would be
the determining factor or not.
89. A
A.      True. There was no change after medical use
was legalised, but contrary to some concerns,
usage among teens declined by nearly 10% in
states where recreational use was legalised.
B.       Cannot say. The passage only suggests this as
one possibility.
C.      Cannot say. There is evidence that teen use
falls when cannabis is legalised, but the pas-
sage does not say either way if this would be
a solution.
D.      Cannot say. The passage does not elaborate
on this.
90. C
A.      Cannot say. This seems quite possible, but
the passage does not discuss Jupiter and the
Sun.
B.       Cannot say. A barycentre being located out-
side a celestial object may be due to distance,
or it may be due to the similar size of the
objects.
C.      True. Even when there are differences in size,
VERBAL REASONING TEST
107

the barycentre is not the exact centre of the
larger object.
D.      Cannot say. The text says that when a less
massive body orbits a more massive one “the
more massive body might be observed to
wobble slightly”. However we are not told if
this happens in the case of the Earth and the
Sun.
91. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not discuss this
specific possibility.
B.       Cannot say. While “it has been argued” that
such missions should not be started, there is
no indication that this is “increasingly
accepted”.
C.      Cannot say. This is given as a point of view,
not as a fact.
D.      True. The passage highlights the risk of a
newer mission overtaking an older one.
92. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not elaborate
on the effects of happy music.
B.       True. Two studies have found that people
with depression felt better after listening to
sad music.
C.      False. Depressed people were found to feel
better after listening to sad music.
D.      Cannot say. The passage only discusses the
effect of instrumental music, not vocal music.
93. A
A.      True. The rise in tuition fees has impacted
those from lower socioeconomic classes more
significantly.
B.       Cannot say. The passage says the United
States has fallen behind, but that does not
mean it led formerly.
C.      Cannot say. The passage says that it is one of
the biggest reasons, but not that it is the
biggest.
D.      False: “fewer young adults are getting a
higher education than their parents”.
94. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage tells us that the syn-
drome “is more prevalent in patients with co-
morbidities such as diabetes, obesity, and
Crohn disease, but can occur in otherwise
healthy individuals”. However, there is no
indication of the likely relative frequency of
any of these so the syndrome may or may not
be most commonly linked to diabetes.
B.       True. Everyone produces alcohol, but in most
people the amounts remains minute.
C.      False. The passage says such people produce
ethanol, not methanol.
D.      False. Because it can produce extreme blood
alcohol levels, auto-brewery syndrome is in
fact potentially dangerous.
95. B
A.      False. The study did in fact find that people
from wealthier communities with more edu-
cation ate better diets.
B.       True. It was found that in poorer communi-
ties where people were less educated, there
were higher rates of prescription painkiller
use.
C.      Cannot say. The passage does not elaborate
on this.
D.      False. That is precisely what the study did
find.
96. D
A.      Cannot say. While loss of profits may be their
concern, the passage never states this and the
video game makers themselves cited other
concerns.
B.       Cannot say. While a neuroscientist suggests
that this might be the case, it is not given as a
definite fact.
C.      Cannot say. The only group mentioned as
opposed to this classification is the video
game industry, so we do not know how
widespread the controversy was.
D.      True. Gaming disorder has been classified as
a mental health condition by the WHO, but a
neuroscientist says it might be a coping
mechanism for a deeper, underlying prob-
lem.
97. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not mention
Saturn or its rings.
B.       False. As the passage states, centrifugal forces
are also needed to pull a satellite apart, mean-
108
VERBAL REASONING TEST

ing that a larger planet’s gravity is not
enough.
C.      False. It is not the tidal forces created by the
satellite that are the issue, but those produced
by the object that it orbits.
D.      True. When the tidal forces exerted on a
planet are greater than its gravitational self-
attraction, then the Roche limit will apply
and it will disintegrate.
98. C
A.      Cannot say. While tidal forces may vary
depending on the distance from the object
being orbited, the passage does not state that
they are erratic.
B.       False. “Sustained tidal heating occurs when
the elliptical orbit is prevented from circular-
izing.”
C.      True. The difference in tidal forces due to an
elliptical orbit is what causes tidal heating.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says that tidal forces
“are stronger near periapsis”, but that does
not necessarily mean that tidal heating is at
its most intense at periapsis. There could, for
example, be a delayed reaction.
99. D
A.      False. Although it can run in families that
does not mean that it always does.
B.       False. Synaesthesia can trigger senses other
than sight.
C.      Cannot say. While saying that a specific type
of visual synaesthesia (grapheme-colour
synaesthesia) is the most common, other
types combined may still make up a majority
of the cases.
D.      True. When a person senses something and
another sense is also activated, that is synaes-
thesia.
100. B
A.      False. Eighty-five percent of respondents
believed their mother had a favourite child,
not both parents.
B.       True. Some parents said they love their chil-
dren equally, but may get along best with one
in particular.
C.      Cannot say. Eight-five percent of respon-
dents thought their mothers had a favourite
child, but we do not know what percentage
of mothers actually did.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says that MANY
parents admit to having a favourite child,
which may or may not mean MOST.
101. D
A.      False. The passage says the percentage of
delayed talkers having persistent language
problems later in life is 40%, which is less
than half.
B.       Cannot say. The passage only mentions that
having mental health risks and delayed lan-
guage skills can be a “double whammy”, but
does not say if one causes the other.
C.      False. This was the first study to link the two,
so it cannot have been already established.
D.      True. The study investigated the link
between toddlers’ delayed vocabulary and
severe temper tantrums, including in chil-
dren as young as 12 months, “which is much
younger than many clinicians typically
believe problematic behaviour can be identi-
fied”.
102. B
A.      Cannot say. We are told only that those born
in the last three months of the school year
were 30% more likely to develop depression
than those born in the first three months.
There is no information about the actual likeli-
hood of any of these children getting depres-
sion.
B.       True. The passage identifies children born in
the summer as being the youngest in their
school year and tells us that “children born in
the last three months of the school year were
prone to being 30% more likely to develop
depression compared to those born in the
first three months”, i.e. those born in the
autumn.
C.      Cannot say. The passage mentions how
younger children may be more at risk of
mental health issues, but does not provide
any remedies or suggestions on how to avoid
it.
D.      Cannot say. The youngest children were 30%
more likely to develop mental health prob-
lems, but as we do not know the actual fre-
quency we cannot say if 30% is frequent or
uncommon.
VERBAL REASONING TEST
109

103. A
A.      True. According to the passage, sleeping in
the daytime on most days could be a sign of
a health problem.
B.       Cannot say. The passage indicates this could
possibly be the case, but not that it is for cer-
tain.
C.      False. There is indeed a lack of a consensus
on the healthiness of daytime napping, with
different studies reaching contradictory con-
clusions.
D.      False. According to the passage, having more
than 1 or 2 naps merely “did not reduce”
risks.
104. C
A.      Cannot say. Logic may dictate as much, but
the article does not elaborate on this.
B.       Cannot say. While stating that sugars and
artificial sweeteners both caused health prob-
lems, of different types, there is no assess-
ment of which problems were worst.
C.      True. The researchers compared people who
drank 2 or more glasses of a soft drink per
day to those who drank less than 1 per
month, i.e. those who frequently drank them
were compared with those who rarely did.
D.      False. Sugary drinks were linked to digestive
diseases, while artificially sweetened drinks
were linked to cardiovascular diseases.
105. C
A.      Cannot say. Panic disorder was one of the
“four common anxiety disorders” studied,
but there is no evaluation of which of the four
involved the strongest feelings of hopeless-
ness.
B.       Cannot say. While saying that increases in
hope were a positive indicator in terms of
recovery, the passage does not say that those
whose hope levels remained unchanged
were NOT expected to recover.
C.      True. The study looked at the use of CBT for
four common anxiety disorders, including
panic disorder, finding that hope was a
“common element” in recovery for all types
and that “increases in hope were greater for
those in active treatment than for those in the
waitlist”.
D.      False. According to the passage, hope
increased gradually, not quickly.
106. C
A.      Cannot say. No association with temperature
was observed except in the case of cold days
that were also damp as well as windy, there-
fore in this case the temperature is irrelevant.
Both windiness and low atmospheric pres-
sure are “linked to more painful days” but
we are not told which of these is the more sig-
nificant.
B.       Cannot say. Cold days can produce more
pain if also damp and windy, and we do not
know if that means most cold days.
C.      True. Cold makes no difference unless also
accompanied by dampness and “the most
important factor associated with worsening
pain is high relative humidity”. Therefore a
cold and dry day will produce less pain than
a warm and damp one.
D.      False. The passage says that dry days are
when patients are “least likely” to experience
pain, which means that they still might.
107. A
A.      True. There is nothing in the passage to say
whether or not binocular rivalry will prove to
be the most accurate method of diagnosis,
but we are told that it “could facilitate earlier
diagnosis”, which is a benefit.
B.       Cannot say. While an advantage of binocular
rivalry is that “it can be used to evaluate
young children who have not started talking
yet as well as non-verbal adults”, it is not
stated whether it is better overall. Verbal
assessment might, for example, be more
accurate in assessing most adults.
C.      Cannot say. Although the rate of binocular
rivalry was predictive of the severity of
symptoms, and the data meant autism could
be diagnosed with 87% accuracy, this does
not necessarily mean that people without
autism never had binocular rivalry. It is pos-
sible that ALL the cases not in the 87% were
where people had autism without showing
binocular rivalry; likewise it is possible that
ALL or SOME of them were where people
had binocular rivalry but not autism.
D.      False. The rate was found to be directly, not
inversely related.
108. B
A.      Cannot say. Although junior researchers who
co-author with established, highly-cited sci-
110
VERBAL REASONING TEST

entists gain a “competitive advantage”, the
comparative importance of the quality of
their work is not discussed.
B.       True. “Junior researchers affiliated with less
prestigious institutions show the most bene-
fits from co-authorship with a top scientist”.
C.      Cannot say. The passage states this as a pos-
sible outcome, not a certainty.
D.      Cannot say. While some junior researchers
do enjoy a competitive advantage “compared
to peers with similar early career profiles but
without top co-authors”, the article does not
consider if this is actually fair or not. Clearly,
if the researchers studied had similar early
career profiles, so were equally qualified, the
selection of which of them got the top co-
authors was not necessarily unfair.
109. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage says this is more
likely to happen to nail-biters than non-nail-
biters, but it does not say that it is for certain.
B.       Cannot say. The passage says that “many
people” think this to be true, but does not say
if it actually is or not.
C.      Cannot say. The passage only says nail-biters
often feel stigmatized, but not whether they
actually are.
D.      True. Nail biters “often suffer psychologi-
cally”, so have a distressing habit, and they
get gastrointestinal infections more fre-
quently.
110. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not discuss any
correlation of this sort.
B.       Cannot say. The passage only says that the
average life satisfaction rate increased, but
that could still allow for it to have decreased
in some member states.
C.      Cannot say. The passage is about life satisfac-
tion, not happiness.
D.      True. The passage does not state either way
whether life satisfaction decreased in some
countries, so it is possible.
111. D
A.      False. Whiplash occurs from a “rapid back-
and-forth movement of the neck”, not just in
one direction.
B.       Cannot say. The text says whiplash “most
often” occurs during a rear-end auto acci-
dent, but that does not necessarily mean this
is the “overwhelming” cause.
C.      False. Whiplash is only a type of neck sprain
or strain, much like how a square is a rectan-
gle but a rectangle is not necessarily a square.
D.      True. Whiplash can be the result of a rear-end
auto accident and can lead to chronic back
pain and other long-lasting complications.
112. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage says that most
people who are infected have no or only
minor symptoms. It does NOT say, however,
what proportion of these people actually
know they have the virus, so we cannot be
sure if most people know or do not know
they have it.
B.       False. Mosquito repellent and covering your
skin with clothes will only reduce your risk.
C.      False. A mosquito-transmitted virus causes
“most” cases of West Nile infection, which
means that some cases have other causes.
D.      True. Since most people infected with West
Nile virus either do not develop signs or
symptoms or have only minor ones, it is pos-
sible that many do not know they are
infected.
113. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage says that wind
speed has been increasing in recent years, but
does not say if this trend will continue or not.
B.       Cannot say. The topic of climate change is not
mentioned.
C.      True. Scientists believed that wind speed was
falling due to increasing urbanisation creat-
ing more barriers to moving air, but despite
continued urbanisation wind speed has
increased in recent years. This has created a
challenge to the former theory.
D.      Cannot say. While saying that scientists
thought the earlier decline in wind speed was
due to urban development, the passage does
not say this was wrong. It leaves open the
possibility that while urban development
does indeed slow wind speed, other factors
increasing wind speed have more recently
counteracted this.
VERBAL REASONING TEST
111

114. A
A.      True. According to the passage, climate
change will not impede the spread of dis-
eases, but instead will facilitate it.
B.       False. The period covered by the data is from
1980. Therefore if last year was the second
highest on record, at some point in the period
there must have been one year with more
such days, meaning that the number of days
did not increase each year.
C.      Cannot say. The passage only discusses the
health impacts of warmer, not wetter, condi-
tions, so we do not know if wetter conditions
will also cause health problems.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says they will have
higher exposure to it, which is different from
saying they will have a higher rate of catch-
ing it. Children may become more resistant
or drugs developed to prevent it being
caught.
115. D
A.      Cannot say. While this might seem plausible,
the passage does not state if this is being
done, or if it is even possible.
B.       False. Current estimates say it could kill up to
70% of European ash trees, which while a
huge proportion, is still not wiping them out.
C.      Cannot say. The passage does not state if sci-
entists are trying to stop ash dieback due to
the economic costs or simply to save the
trees.
D.      True. If the fungus can kill up 70% of ash
trees, and up to 70 million trees could be lost
in the UK, that means that there are approxi-
mately 100 million ash trees in the United
Kingdom.
116. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage says men are most
stressed when they are entirely economically
dependent on their partner, but then says
husbands are at their most anxious when they
are the sole breadwinner, so we cannot say.
B.       True. According to the study, men were least
stressed when their spouse made 40% of the
total household income, leaving them as the
primary breadwinner.
C.      False. The study only looked at heterosexual
couples, thus stating that the study found
that gender did not matter would be false.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says the study sug-
gests this may be the case, but not that it is
known for certain. Men’s anxiety could be
being triggered by economic factors or the
difficulties of juggling two careers.
117. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage does not mention
anything about girls learning faster at
younger ages, only that having an older sister
does not impact a younger sibling’s language
skills.
B.       Cannot say. The passage mentions this as a
possibility, but not as something that is defi-
nitely true.
C.      True. According to the passage, children with
an older sister did not actually differ in their
language skills from those with no older sib-
ling.
D.      False. According to the passage, older broth-
ers take up more of their parents’ time, not
spend more time with their younger siblings.
118. A
A.      True. As the passage states, of those trying to
lose weight, few find success, and the mean
weight of those studied actually increased.
B.       Cannot say. The passage does not state if
there was an unknown reason for the weight
gain or not. The reason might be known but
simply not given here.
C.      Cannot say. While willpower might seem
likely to have been a factor, the passage does
not mention it one way or another.
D.      Cannot say. We are told that “a minimum of
one in four participants reported trying to
lose weight in each of the two-year periods”.
However we do not know if these were dif-
ferent sets of participants or if some people
were surveyed in both periods. If the latter, it
could be that less than a quarter of ALL the
participants attempted to lose weight.
119. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage merely says that
overconfident parents might not pick up on
subtle signals, not what less confident ones
might do.
B.       Cannot say. We are told that “30 percent of
parents said their child is good at hiding feel-
ings and 40 percent said they struggle to dif-
112
VERBAL REASONING TEST

ferentiate between their child's normal mood
swings and signs of depression”. We are
NOT told, however, if these two subsets of
parents overlap, with some in both groups,
so the two figures cannot simply be added
together.
C.      True. According to the passage, only a third
of parents said they were confident they
could detect depression in their children.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says that “one-third
were confident they could detect depression
in their children” but we are not told what
proportion of these might overestimate their
ability to detect depression.
120. B
A.      False. According to the passage, the increased
risk appears to occur because the genes that
are linked to height are also associated with
atrial fibrillation.
B.       True. Since taller people have a higher risk of
atrial fibrillation, and atrial fibrillation
increases a person’s risk of stroke, it follows
that taller people are at higher risk of a
stroke.
C.      Cannot say. The passage does not clarify if
the two are related or coincidental.
D.      Cannot say. While aggressive control of
blood pressure and diabetes could reduce
risk, we are not told whether this could be
reduced to normal levels.
121. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage says there are many
myths surrounding them, but does not say if
most of the common knowledge about them
is wrong.
B.       False. According to the passage, not fighting
an intrusive thought will make it go away.
C.      False. According to the passage, the opposite
is the case.
D.      True. Rather than making intrusive thoughts
go away, the effort people put into fighting
the thought is what makes it stick and fuels
its return.
122. C
A.      Cannot say. The age of a car is neither men-
tioned nor excluded as a factor.
B.       Cannot say. The passage discusses cars but
there is no reference to trains.
C.      True. A person’s muscles are in use through-
out long car journeys to keep their posture
properly maintained.
D.      Cannot say. While turns are cited as one
factor, others are involved, such as the condi-
tion of the car and how often it brakes. On a
straight road these other factors may out-
weigh the benefits from lack of turns.
123. C
A.      Cannot say. While the passage states that
standing puts more strain on fewer muscles,
particularly the calves, it does not say either
way if they have a lower threshold for pain
than others.
B.       False. The core muscles only contribute to,
and are not the sole reason, why walking
hurts less than standing still.
C.      True. We are told that “when you’re walking,
a greater number of muscles in both the legs
are engaged” and also that “walking doesn’t
hurt nearly as much as standing still”.
Therefore standing still is an activity that
uses fewer muscles than another activity,
walking, that is less painful.
D.      False. The reason walking is less painful is
because it involves frequently alternating
which leg bears the load, while standing,
although using both legs, involves longer
periods of load bearing per leg.
124. B
A.      False. The passage says they are “less likely”
to die before reaching the end of their life
expectancy, meaning that some will die
beforehand.
B.       True. As the passage states, even tree-lined
streets held positives for people.
C.      Cannot say. As the text says: “more research
is needed to determine the most evident ben-
efit of urban green spaces”.
D.      Cannot say. While this is true of women, the
figures for men are not given and could be
different enough to change the overall result.
125. A
A.      True. The passage tells us that another name
for lactose malabsorption is lactose intoler-
ance, and that lactose intolerance is usually
caused by a deficiency of lactase.
B.       False. According to the passage, most people
VERBAL REASONING TEST
113

with lactose intolerance can manage the con-
dition without having to give up all dairy
foods.
C.      False. Some people with low levels of lactase
can digest milk products without problems.
Lactose intolerance is when these low levels
lead to symptoms after eating dairy foods.
D.      Cannot say. Although saying that lactose
intolerance is generally harmless, the text
does not say either way if it can be quite dan-
gerous or not.
126. D
A.      False. While snow does absorb sound, the
passage says it becomes quieter, not totally
quiet.
B.       Cannot say. We are told that when snow
refreezes “it can become hard and reflect
sound waves, causing sounds to travel far-
ther and become clearer”. However the effect
is not quantified.
C.      Cannot say. While it may seem likely that
there is some relationship of this sort, the pas-
sage does not refer to any.
D.      True. Soft, fluffy snow acts as a sound
absorber, but “as the structure of snow
changes, the amount of noise in the sur-
rounding environment could increase”.
127. A
A.      True. Sunspots “look dark only in compari-
son with the brighter and hotter regions of
the photosphere around them.”
B.       False. While sunspots are relatively cooler,
they are about 3,800 degrees Kelvin (3,527
degrees Celsius), which cannot be called cold.
C.      Cannot say. We are told only that they “can
be very large, up to 50,000 kilometres in
diameter”, and nothing about how their
usual size compares to that of the Earth.
D.      Cannot say. The passage says that sunspots
can release flares and mass ejections, but does
not say if these types of eruptions are limited
to sunspots or not.
128. C
A.      Cannot say. Both occur above thunderstorms,
but we are not given any data on which can
reach the highest altitudes.
B.       Cannot say. We are told that blue jets propa-
gate from the tops of thunderclouds at
around 100km per second but there is no
information about the velocity of blue ten-
drils, which trail below red sprites.
C.      True. Red sprites form between 40 and 90 km
in altitude and this includes the ionospheric
D region, which is between 70 and 90 km in
altitude. The causes of both red sprites and
blue jets are not known, therefore they are
unexplained.
D.      False. Red sprites form “over a broad region
between 40 and 90 km in altitude” and as the
mesosphere is “between about 50 and 80 km
in altitude”, this means they can form outside
the mesosphere.
129. A
A.      True. Glaciers form when water recrystal-
lizes, that is freezes, meaning that cold tem-
peratures are what is essential. If it is cold
enough, elevation is not important.
B.       False. According to the passage, glaciers can
exist on high mountains even in tropical cli-
mates.
C.      Cannot say. While this may seem very likely,
the passage does not explicitly say where the
largest glaciers are located.
D.      Cannot say. According to the passage, tem-
perature is only one thing that determines the
glacier formation rate, wetness is another
factor.
130. D
A.      False. It lowered bad cholesterol by four per-
cent.
B.       Cannot say. The fibre fuels gut bacteria that
may reduce cholesterol, so it’s not known for
certain.
C.      Cannot say. The passage only refers to
“healthier, more relaxed blood vessels” as a
benefit that eating apples and drinking red
wine or tea have in common; what other ben-
efits any of them might have, or their relative
value, is not discussed.
D.      True. According to the passage, eating two
apples a day lowered “bad” cholesterol levels
in the study group, and the fibre in apples
fuels gut bacteria that may reduce choles-
terol.
131. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage only discusses the
114
VERBAL REASONING TEST

results of the research, not the possible effect
on public policy.
B.       True. Though the dataset of over 1.5 billion
opioid prescriptions has indicated a correla-
tion between easier access to cannabis and
lower prescribing of opioids, “the effect of
these laws on opioid use is not well under-
stood for all dimensions of use and for the
general United States population”.
C.      Cannot say. The passage says there is good
reason to think this may be the case, but at
the moment it is still not well understood.
D.      False. As the passage states, “cannabis access
laws have different effects across types of
providers, physician specialties, and payers”.
132. C
A.      Cannot say. The passage only says that drink-
ing is a common feature of workplace social
events, but does not mention drinking to
excess.
B.       False. According to the passage, the percent-
age who said there were positive effects was
“almost” 50%, which is less than half, so it is
a minority.
C.      True. If 40% of events have freely available
alcohol and 39% have it for purchase with no
limits, then only 21% of events have some
sort of limit on consumption, which is a
minority.
D.      Cannot say. This may seem plausible, but the
comparison is not made in the text.
133. B
A.      Cannot say. The passage says that “the prob-
lem is caused by global access to ultra-pro-
cessed foods, and people exercising less”, so
we cannot be sure what the main reason is.
B.       True. As the passage states, individuals can
experience both forms of malnutrition at dif-
ferent points in their lives.
C.      False. Obesity means being very overweight,
so by definition someone who is obese cannot
be too thin at the same time.
D.      False. 45 countries were affected in the 1990s
and 48 in the 2010s, so the figure has actually
been rather stable.
134. A
A.      True. According to the passage, thin hair
tends to be stronger than thick, which
researchers suggest is related to the size and
quantity of flaws in the hair strand.
B.       Cannot say. Although thin hair was found to
be stronger than thick hair, we are not told
whether the relationship was inversely pro-
portional.
C.      Cannot say. While capybara hair is “one
exception” to the tendency for thin hair to be
stronger than thick hair, we are not told if it is
“the one exception”, i.e. the ONLY exception.
D.      Cannot say. While human hair is an example
of thin hair, that does not rule out the possi-
bility of there being many types of thinner
hair that are stronger.
135. C
A.      Cannot say. The AAA’s study found that
drivers’ use of adaptive cruise control and
lane-keeping-assist technologies “puts them
at greater risk of crashing” but there is no
indication of whether the AAA thinks their
use should be discouraged.
B.       False. According to the passage, “when used
correctly, the technologies can make people
safer”.
C.      True. According to the study, some drivers
were prone to over-rely on these driving
technologies and would not pay as much
attention as they otherwise would.
D.      Cannot say. The passage only says that those
two systems make drivers almost twice as
likely to drive distractedly, but it does not
specify if that means using either of them, or
both simultaneously.
136. D
A.      Cannot say. The passage only says this in ref-
erence to European professors.
B.       Cannot say. The passage says universities are
accused of this, and that professors are more
liberal and left-leaning than other profession-
als, but that cannot be equated with universi-
ties being hostile to conservative values.
C.      False. The passage said there was no greater
homogeneity, i.e. no less heterogeneity,
among the professoriate relative to other spe-
cific professions.
D.      True. According to the study, differences
between professors and other professionals
with a social science degree were not as clear
as they were in other fields, such as medical,
STEM, economics and law.
VERBAL REASONING TEST
115