======================================================================
DIGITAL LITERACY TEST
======================================================================

11. Digital Literacy Tests
A new feature of EPSO competitions is going to be digital literacy tests.  An invitation
to tender to create such tests was issued in February 2023.
Based on what is currently known, this is our best advice as to what you might expect
and how you can prepare. But first, note these key points:
• Not all competitions will have these tests. However, it is as yet unclear which ones
will and which ones won’t, and it will ultimately depend upon the requirements of
EPSO’s clients (the institutions)
• The tests will probably only be available in English because that is the language of
the software used both in the institutions and in the digital world as a whole
• The tests will take the form of multiple-choice questions (MCQs)
• The questions won’t be for IT specialists but will be instead designed to reflect the
issues and challenges that EU staff confront during their working lives
• For Administrators, the questions are likely to be mainly conceptual (e.g. “What is
the dark web?”) while for Assistants, the questions are likely to be mainly more
practical (e.g. “How do you input data into a spreadsheet?”).
The EU Digital Competence Framework/EPSO Competency
Framework
It is worth at the outset referencing two competency frameworks.
The Digital Competence Framework originated by the European Commission covers
five core areas:
1. Information and data literacy: The ability to locate, store, retrieve, manage and
organise digital data, information and content, as well as to determine its accuracy,
relevance and trustworthiness.
2. Communication and collaboration: The ability to interact with people and to com-
municate via different digital technologies and services. This includes managing
your digital presence and personal brand.
3. Digital content creation: The ability to create and share digital content, such as blogs,
podcasts, videos and social networking updates. This also requires a thorough
understanding of copyright laws and licensing.
4. Safety: The ability to protect devices and data in digital environments, as well as to

take care of physical and psychological health in a connected world and to under-
stand the social and environmental impact that these technologies can have.
5. Problem solving: The ability to use digital tools to solve problems and to innovate
processes and products. Part of problem solving includes understanding how to
stay-up-to-date with new technologies and the ongoing digital revolution.
The revised EPSO general competency framework we referred to in Chapter 1
includes Information management (digital and data literacy). This is defined by EPSO as:
“Translates knowledge and skills through digital tools and technologies, optimises
ways of working by utilising the digital environment”.
The “anchors” of the EPSO competency − the behaviours by which this new compe-
tency is measured − are:
● Uses relevant sources and different search strategies to fulfil the information needs
arising from complex tasks
● Evaluates the credibility and reliability of sources, data, information and content in
digital environments
● Selects and applies appropriate digital tools and technologies to work with others,
interact and share information
● Recognizes the value of digital competencies and shows willingness to invest time
proactively in keeping up to date with digital evolution
● Indicates and explains technological needs clearly to colleagues, service providers
and stakeholders
You can expect the topics referenced in these frameworks to be represented when it
comes to the digital literacy tests.
It’s also worth noting that the tests will be designed so that they don’t rely on a high-
speed internet connection, to avoid issues with lag and delivery. The goal is to provide
a fair and unbiased way of testing digital literacy that won’t be affected by the device
people use or the physical location that they’re in.
The basics of cybersecurity
It should go without saying that if you’re going to work in an official capacity for the
EU institutions or one of its agencies, delegations or representations you’ll need to
understand the basics of cybersecurity. In particular, you’ll need to be aware of the pos-
sibility of cyberattacks sponsored by hostile states or others.
The main types of cyberattack
Let’s take a look at a few of the most common types of cyberattack that EPSO will
likely expect you to be aware of:
1. DoS/DDoS attacks: Denial-of-service and distributed denial-of-service attacks aim
to take a digital system offline by overwhelming its resources with false requests.
It’s a brute force style attack that’s commonly used to take websites offline by flood-
ing their servers until they’re unable to serve pages to legitimate visitors.
392
DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS

2. Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attacks: With MITM attacks, the attacker can eavesdrop
on data that’s being sent from one machine to another. For example, they might
snoop on public WiFi networks to monitor unencrypted emails that are sent across
the network.
3. Phishing: This kind of attack uses “social engineering” to trick people into providing
credentials and other sensitive information by hooking them in with some kind of
bait. An attacker might send out emails purporting to be from customer support or
Google and telling people they need to reset their Outlook or Gmail password via
an attacker-owned website. Subcategories of phishing include whale phishing
(aimed at people who are high up in an organisation) and spear phishing (which tar-
gets a specific individual).
4. Ransomware: With ransomware attacks, victims are held hostage until they pay
some sort of ransom, often using cryptocurrency. Both private and public bodies can
face this sort of dangerous attack. It is thought many instances of ransomware
attacks go unreported, organisations covertly paying ransoms to avoid security vul-
nerabilities becoming public and facing the costs of data breaches.
5. Password attacks and “brute force” attacks: These types of attacks revolve around
identifying passwords, often by guessing common passwords or using brute force
techniques to try hundreds of thousands of variants until there’s a match.
6. URL Interpretation: With this kind of attack, attackers try to manipulate URLs to
gain access to privileged information or private systems. For example, they might
guess that going to /admin on a target website might take them to a login screen for
the admin panel.
7. Insider attacks: These attacks are made by people from within an organisation. They
can be carried out by industrial spies or disgruntled employees and tend to be par-
ticularly successful because the insiders often have a large amount of access to inter-
nal systems.
8. Trojan horses: Trojan horses take their name from the famous Greek manoeuvre
during the Trojan War in which soldiers hid inside a wooden horse offered as a gift.
Modern day Trojan horses are legitimate-looking files that contain malicious code
within them.
9. Malware: Malware is a portmanteau of “malicious software”, and it refers to any type
of computer program that infects a computer and has detrimental effects. Malware can
spy on users, access data and spread from one device to another across a network.
How to protect yourself
So what can you do to protect yourself and your organisation from cyberattacks? Here
are a few of the main techniques and best practices:
1. Use secure passwords: You should go out of your way to create and use secure pass-
words consisting of a random selection of letters, numbers and symbols, avoiding
dictionary words, names and dates. Try to use different passwords for every site and
to update them on a regular basis.
2. Keep antivirus software up-to-date: Be sure to use reputable antivirus, antimalware and
firewall software on all of your devices and to keep them running and up-to-date.
3. Don’t install software from untrusted vendors: Never install software unless it’s
provided by a reputable vendor. Even then, try to avoid installing unnecessary soft-
ware and obey any guidelines that are set out by your IT department.
DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS
393

394
DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS
4. Check URLs and look for HTTPS: Always double check URLs before you enter sen-
sitive information, especially if you’ve arrived at them after clicking a link. When
submitting financial or other sensitive data, look for the padlock icon and check to
see that there’s a HTTPS connection.
5. Don’t click suspicious links: Never click a link that looks suspicious or that comes
from a source that you don’t trust. If you’re unsure about a link that a friend or col-
league has sent you, ask them to confirm that the link is safe. If in doubt, don’t click
the link.
6. Use two-factor authentication: Two-factor authentication is a type of authentication
in which you’ll be asked to enter a code that’s sent to your email address or smart-
phone. This reduces the chances of someone else gaining unauthorised access to
your account.
7. Use a VPN: A VPN (virtual private network) can help you to maintain privacy and
anonymity while accessing the internet. It’s particularly important to use a VPN
when accessing the internet from a public WiFi connection.
8. Never save your data and logins: Never store your usernames, passwords or other
data on a machine, especially if it’s publicly accessible. Make a point of regularly
clearing your browsing history, saved forms and cached data.
9. Limit your social media profiles: When you’re using social networking sites, con-
sider limiting your usage and avoiding creating unnecessary profiles. If you no
longer use a site, delete your account. Consider making your profiles private, espe-
cially if you’re a public-facing EU employee.
10.Keep your eyes on the news: Regularly read tech and mainstream news sites to look
for new security threats and best practices. Apply what you’ve learned so that you
can continue to stay safe in an ever-changing landscape.
What you need to know about AI
Artificial intelligence (AI) is an old concept that has seen a recent huge surge in inter-
est and applicability. At its core, the idea is to give machines the ability to “think” like
human beings.
AI technology already powers many of the digital tools that we interact with on a
daily basis, from recommendations algorithms on streaming sites to smart cities that use
AI to re-route traffic to avoid traffic jams.
However, while AI has the potential to revolutionise many areas of our lives, it also
poses a couple of threats. Some thought leaders have sided with science fiction writers
and theorised that sentient AI will one day take over the world like something from the
Matrix. However, this is unlikely, and given that AI is here to stay whether we like it or
not, our role is to find out how to live with it instead of trying to shut it down com-
pletely.
The other argument is that AI will take our jobs, and there seems to be a certain
amount of truth to that. We can see this in action through “generative” AI like
Midjourney and ChatGPT, which are taking on image and text generation respectively
and threatening the livelihoods of artists and writers and potentially many others. When
it comes to AI’s impact on EU employees, one thing to be aware of is that there could be
implications for the size of the EU workforce and the tasks it undertakes.

DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS
395
You should spend time learning about these tools and understanding their applica-
tions, both for the EPSO tests and for use in the wider workplace.
The types of AI
There are several different types of AI to be aware of, and it is not uncommon for more
than one of them to be used in any given algorithm. The three most common types of AI
include:
• Artificial intelligence (AI): Artificial intelligence is the process of using computer
algorithms to simulate human intelligence.
• Machine learning (ML): Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence which
aims to mimic the way that humans learn so that an algorithm can “teach” itself.
• Natural Language Processing (NLP): Natural language processing is a subset of AI
that’s often powered by machine learning and which deals with the processing of
human languages.
Machine learning algorithms work by human beings providing the algorithm with
labelled data and then leaving it to draw its own conclusions. For example, a traditional
algorithm would tell dogs and cats apart by following a list of criteria that a human had
programmed into it. A machine learning algorithm would be given thousands of pic-
tures of dogs and cats and be left to draw its own conclusions about what makes a dog
a dog and a cat a cat.
AI often works by making “educated” predictions. For example, self-driving cars
work by a machine learning algorithm processing data on human driving and making
predictions about what a human driver would do next in any given situation.
Natural language processing is often powered by machine learning and is what’s used
to power smart assistants, chatbots and any other types of computer software that input
or output voice-based or text-based language. Next time you speak to your Alexa, you’re
using natural language processing.
You won’t need to have hands-on experience with creating these algorithms to pass
the EPSO tests, but you will need to know the differences between them. Expect to hear
a lot more about all three types of AI in the months and years to come.
Example questions
Here, we’re going to focus on the types of questions that Administrators are likely to
face in these new tests.
Let’s take a closer look at each of those five core competencies in the Digital
Competence Framework.
Information and data literacy
Information and data literacy is all about searching for, retrieving, processing and
storing information. This means being able to search online for the information that you
need while determining whether the source of the content is trustworthy and whether
it’s relevant to the information in question.
In other words, EPSO will be looking for evidence that you’re able to use the internet

396
DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS
for research purposes, starting with the way that you articulate your needs and working
right the way through to how you decide which websites to trust.
Example Questions
1. Which of the following websites shouldn’t be trusted as a primary source?
a) www.europa.eu
b) www.wikipedia.org
c) www.gov.uk
d)www.who.int
ANSWER: b) Wikipedia should never be used as a primary source. It can be used to
uncover information, but all facts should be checked via an external, reputable website.
2. Which of the following operators allows you to exclude a search term on Google?
a) AND
b) OR
c) -
d)*
ANSWER: c) Running a search like “movies -Marvel" will exclude the word “Marvel”
and display a set of results that contain the word “movies” but which don’t mention
Marvel.
Communication and collaboration
Communication and collaboration skills allow you to work with other people via the
internet and other remote technological tools and protocols. EPSO’s questions will likely
be designed to determine how well you’re able to do this.
On top of one-to-one and one-to-many communication via email, instant messaging
and video calls, communication and collaboration also entails managing a digital pres-
ence and a strong personal brand. This means having at least a basic understanding of
content creation and social networking sites, as well as how to manage private social
media accounts to mitigate reputational risk if you’re an identifiable EU official.
This will also cover which social media platforms are officially used by EU institutions
and bodies, as well as closed versus open institutional cultures. For example, the
European Parliament as a political representative body has to interact differently with
the general public than does an institution like the European Central Bank.
Candidates may be tested on their knowledge of how to best communicate with
people who are digitally excluded, such as the poor, the elderly and those suffering from
mental illnesses. They’ll also potentially be expected to make judgements on when digi-
tal interaction is appropriate with colleagues and when an in-person situation may be
better.

Example Questions
1. Which of the following tools can’t currently be used to initiate a video call?
a) Skype
b) WhatsApp
c) Twitter
d)Zoom
ANSWER: c) Twitter is the only one of these tools that doesn’t currently offer native
video call functionality.
2. Which of the following social networks does EPSO not have an official presence on?
a) Facebook
b) TikTok
c) LinkedIn
d)YouTube
ANSWER: b) At the time of writing, EPSO has an official presence on Facebook,
Instagram, LinkedIn, Twitter and YouTube.
Digital content creation
Digital content creation is the process of creating, editing and distributing digital con-
tent, from social media posts to video clips, podcasts and blog posts. While it’s unlikely
that EPSO will require you to be able to manipulate images or edit video clips, you’ll
need to demonstrate a basic understanding of what’s possible.
The questions in this area will also test your ability to improve an existing body of
knowledge by editing/updating it and adding new content. You’ll also need to under-
stand the basics of copyright law and how licensing laws are applied.
Example Questions
1. Which of the following is a type of website where its contents can be edited by any
user?
a) Blog site
b) Social networking site
c) File sharing site
d)Wiki site
ANSWER: d) A Wiki site allows users to sign up and to edit pages, with Wikipedia being
the most well-known example. On the other types of site, any user can sign up and post
content, but they’re unable to edit content that’s posted by other users.
DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS
397

398
DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS
2. Which of the following licenses allows you to share and modify content with no attri-
bution?
a) Public domain
b) Creative commons
c) Exclusive license
d)Limited use license
ANSWER: a) When something is licensed to the public domain, anybody can take and
use that asset in any way they want to. Creative commons licenses require attribution,
and exclusive and limited use licenses come with other, additional restrictions.
Safety
The topic of safety is all about protecting devices, data, privacy and people in digital
environments, and this also includes your overall wellbeing. This requires you to be
aware of everything from cybercrime and cyberbullying to the social pressure that
people can feel when comparing their lives to the perfect-looking lives of others.
All of these issues are escalating by the day and could potentially threaten the opera-
tion of digitally-based organisations, as well as our overall societal wellbeing. For exam-
ple, if an EU agency is successfully attacked by cybercriminals, the effects of such an
attack could be devastating.
Get to know which technologies are banned in the EU, along with how hostile state
sponsorship can lead to hacker groups targeting governmental organisations.
You should also be aware of the difficulties that come from finding a balance between
openness and security. For example, should EU agencies be willing to open ZIP files
when communicating with external stakeholders? In a situation like this, there’s no
“right” answer, but you’ll be expected to be able to argue both sides.
Example Questions
1. What would be the impact of a successful ransomware attack on an EU agency?
a) Personal information and financial data could be accessed by attackers
b) Digital software could be locked down and held hostage
c) The agency could face fines and other financial losses
d)All of the above
ANSWER: d) Ransomware attacks can be devastating for organisations of all shapes and
sizes, and EU institutions and agencies are certainly at risk due to their high profile and
the amount of data that they have access to. Because of this, it’s important for agencies
to take steps to secure themselves.
2. What is social engineering in an IT context?
a) Manipulating personally identifiable information
b) Building social networking platforms
c) An approach that cyber criminals use which relies on human error
d)Forcibly befriending people online for personal advancement

ANSWER: c) Social engineering is a technique that cyber criminals use to exploit com-
puterised systems by tapping into human error. Examples include guessing “password”
and “12345” as users’ passwords, or leaving corrupted flash drives in public places in the
hope that someone picks them up and inserts them into a computer to see what’s on
them, or calling up EU staff claiming to be from the Help desk and asking for passwords.
Problem solving
Problem-solving builds upon the other four areas that we’ve covered and requires you
to be able to identify problems and to come up with proactive solutions to address them.
Given the huge scope of digital literacy, these types of problems can vary widely in size
and severity.
As part of this, EPSO will be looking for evidence that you’re able to use digital tools
to solve problems and to foster innovation. This will require you to stay up-to-date with
the latest technologies and best practices and to understand the different ways that dig-
ital tools can be applied to change ways of working.
Example Questions
1. Which of the following approaches should you NOT use to try to solve a software
problem?
a) Consulting the user manual for the software
b) Posting on a support forum
c) Investigating and modifying the source code
d)Contacting the company’s customer service hotline
ANSWER: c) Modifying the source code is best left to expert programmers and coders,
and it’s usually expressly forbidden by licensing agreements. If you’re experiencing a
problem with a piece of software, you should first check the user manual before reaching
out to the company’s customer service team, which may or may not include a support
forum as an option.
2. How can you best increase the likelihood that your organisation will adopt a new tool?
a) Showcase the ways it can improve workflows
b) Tell people that they’ll face disciplinary action if they don’t use the tool
c) Remove old software and other alternatives to the new tool
d)Send out an email to let people know that the new tool is available
ANSWER: a) As a general rule, the best way to encourage buy-in to a new tool is to
showcase how it can help people to be better at their jobs. Threatening them with disci-
plinary action or removing old software might increase adoption, but it will also lead to
ill-feeling amongst employees. Sending out an email is only likely to bring in early
adopters and is less efficient than showing people the benefits of adopting the tool.
DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS
399

Preparing for digital literacy tests
Because there’s still a lot that we don’t know about the digital literacy test, including
the sort of specific questions that are going to be asked, we can only offer general advice
about how to prepare for the test.

With that said, here are our ten top tips for preparing yourself:
1. Spend time online, familiarising yourself with the language and best practices that
people are using.
2. Join discussion forums and support forums for the tools and technologies that you
know the least about.
3. Keep an eye on the latest trends and technologies such as artificial intelligence and
cloud computing.
4. Learn how to research and fact check information online.
5. If possible, practise using Apple and Android mobile devices and Apple and
Windows desktop computers.
6. Read books and blogs, listen to podcasts and watch YouTube channels about digital
technologies.
7. Create a blog site or a podcast and use it as a way to practise using social media and
content creation tools.
8. Practise troubleshooting tech problems yourself instead of Googling the solution.
9. Consider taking digital literacy courses on Skillshare and other similar websites.
10.Keep your eyes peeled on the EPSO website for further updates about what the tests
will cover.
We don’t know what the balance will be like between operational questions and
broader conceptual issues about the appropriateness of digital tools and their impacts on
social cohesion, and so the best thing you can do for now is to focus on a mixture of the
two.
It’s also a good idea to regularly consult quality information sources, from tech web-
sites to quality newspapers and magazines like The Economist, because you’ll see a lot of
the key issues being flagged up and discussed.
400
DIGITAL LITERACY TESTS