======================================================================
EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
======================================================================

12. The EU Knowledge Test
Why an EU knowledge test?
EU knowledge tests were a regular feature of the competitions in EPSO’s early years. Then, in
the sweeping reform of the EPSO system introduced in 2010, EU knowledge testing was aban-
doned. Under the new system, other of course than testing of specific technical knowledge in the
field of the competition, candidates were evaluated solely in terms of their pure reasoning skills
and work-related behaviours, their soft skills.
Over time, however, there was an increasing drumbeat of criticism from within the institutions
that too many of the candidates they were being presented with, while undoubtedly very capable,
lacked commitment to and understanding of the deeper purposes of European integration. For
such candidates, working for the EU was essentially no different from working for X corporation
or Y bank. In that respect, what was happening with the selection of permanent civil servants
seemed to mirror the increased reliance on contract agents whose recruitment was based only on
their technical knowledge and skills in the field they were being recruited for. To the critics it
seemed that the connection to the vision of a truly European civil service creating a new Europe
− the vision of the “founding fathers” − was being lost and replaced by a generic “Anglo-
American” model that took no account of what was unique about the EU administration.
In response to this criticism EPSO for the 2018 graduate (generalist) competition introduced a
“motivational interview”, used as part of the assessment to explore candidates’ motivations for
joining the EU. Under the 2023 system in a further, bigger step it has reintroduced the formal test-
ing of EU knowledge. This is therefore not “just another test” for candidates but symbolically a
restatement of commitment to the values at the core of the EU administration.
What the tests will involve
How widely EU knowledge testing will be applied remains to be seen, though it will certainly
feature in competitions like the AD5 generalist competition planned for autumn 2023. However,
the essentials of what the test will involve are known.
Firstly, the test will be in the form of multiple-choice questions, MCQs. In other words, these
are fact-based questions to which the answer options you are given will be either right or wrong.
The test will not involve writing sophisticated and nuanced answers exploring the ambiguities or
complexities of EU integration and goals.
Secondly, the questions will be based on universally accessible sources of information and not
require information known only to insiders with privileged access. Indeed, candidates will be

402
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
1.        What is the most common form of decision-
making used to adopt EU legislation?
A.      White paper
B.       Agreement procedure
C.      Ordinary Legislative Procedure
D.      Special procedure
2.        When was co-decision making officially
named the Ordinary Legislative Procedure?
A.      Under the Lisbon Treaty in 2009
B.       It was introduced in the Amsterdam Treaty
in 1999
C.      It was extended under the Maastricht Treaty
in 1992
D.      It has been used since the founding of the
European Communities
3.        Which EU institution has the right of initia-
tive?
A.      The Council of the European Union
B.       The European Commission
C.      The European Parliament
D.      The Council of Europe
4.        How many main stages, known as readings,
does the Ordinary Legislative Procedure set
out?
A.      2
B.       6
C.      1
D.      3
5.        How does the European Parliament vote
during
the
first
reading
in
Ordinary
Legislative Procedure files?
A.      By qualified majority
B.       By simple majority
C.      Unanimous vote
D.      Early voting
told what sources will be used. This example is followed in the test questions in this chapter,
where you can see exactly where the answer information comes from. The sources we have used
give a good clue to where you might concentrate your study.
Thirdly, there will be none of the “EU quiz” type questions that were seen in the pre-2010 tests,
of the “how many women commissioners are there in the Von der Leyen Commission?” type. The
MCQs will be substantive questions requiring meaningful knowledge and focused on topics such
as the treaty base, legislative procedures, institutional competencies and how the institutions
work together, key policies and programmes. The questions below have been created with this in
mind.
Fourthly, it has been indicated by EPSO that the questions may be available in all 24 official
languages, though of course that remains to be confirmed by the Notices of Competition. That
said, it is recommended to broaden your study to ensure you are familiar with EU terminology
in your second language. Remember that if you reach the Reserve List and are called for inter-
view, your understanding of the EU will be judged in your second language.
100 QUESTIONS −ANSWERS follow questions

I.  Legislative procedures of the EU (30 Questions)

THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
403
6.        In the Council of the EU, what is the thresh-
old for a qualified majority?
A.      Half of member states
B.       45% of member states, representing half of
the EU population
C.      65% of member states, representing at least
55% of the population
D.      55% of member states, representing at least
65% of the EU population
7.        What is a trilogue in the context of the EU’s
Ordinary Legislative Procedure (OLP)?
A.      An informal interinstitutional negotiation
between representatives of the three main
institutions
B.       A formal interinstitutional meeting to negoti-
ate the legislative file set out in the Treaties
C.      An official step of the OLP held to help draw
up the initial legislative proposal
D.      A meeting between the EU Commission and
civil society organisations
8.        What is a Council “general approach”?
A.      A document explaining the way in which the
Council usually proceeds in legislative files
B.       A political agreement to give the EP an idea
of its position before official negotiations
C.      A binding piece of legislation applicable in all
EU member states, with general application
D.      An act to be adopted by the EU Parliament in
second reading
9.        Do the Council and the European Parliament
have a time limit for the first reading of the
Ordinary Legislative Procedure?
A.      Yes, negotiations must conclude within three
months
B.       The Parliament has no time limit, but the
Council does
C.      Yes, the Commission sets the deadline
D.      No, they are not subject to any time limit
10.      What is the title given to the Member of the
European Parliament responsible for drafting
the Parliament’s report and who acts as
spokesperson during the interinstitutional
negotiations?
A.      Rapporteur
B.       Shadow
C.      President
D       Writer
11.      Which institutions are legislators in the
Special Legislative Procedure?
A.      Only the Council
B.       The Council and the EU Parliament
C.      The EU Commission, Council and Parliament
D.      The European Council and the Court of
Justice of the EU
12.      Under the Special Legislative Procedure, the
European Parliament:
A.      Co-decides on an equal footing with the
Council
B.       Amends a legislative proposal
C.      May not act in any circumstance
D.      May be consulted on the proposal
13.      In the Special Legislative Procedure, for leg-
islative and non-legislative proposals, the
consent of the EU Parliament is required:
A.      In all cases
B.       Exclusively for Article 7 (Rule of Law) and
Article 50 (withdrawal from the EU) proce-
dures
C.      For discrimination, international agreements,
Article 7, EU accession and withdrawal
D.      When it is invited to participate in the proce-
dure by the other institutions
14.      Which of the following make up EU primary
law?
A.      EU directives and regulations
B.       All legislative acts

C.      Regulations, directives, decisions, recom-
mendations and opinions
D.      EU Treaties
15.      Which statement is true about EU regula-
tions?
A.      Regulations allow member states to deter-
mine how they transpose the law into their
national legislation
B.       Regulations are of general application,
legally binding, and apply immediately in
member states
C.      Regulations are primary legislation of the EU
D.      Regulations are legally binding and have one
specific addressee
16.      What is the process of transposition?
A.      It is the incorporation of EU directives into
member states’ national legislation
B.       It is a necessary process for EU regulations
and decisions, since they are not directly
applicable
C.      It is a voluntary process from member states,
without a specific deadline
D.      It is not a compulsory process and the
Commission cannot act if it is not carried out
by a member state
17.      Which of the following is a characteristic of
Delegated Acts?
A.      They allow member states to immediately
modify EU legislation and adapt it to
national legislation
B.       They enter into force even if the EU
Parliament and Council object, so the
Commission has full powers
C.      They are used in slow procedures to acceler-
ate the negotiations
D.      They allow the Commission to act swiftly, to
amend certain non-essential elements of laws
18.      Delegated Acts are typically used in cases
such as:
A.      When legislative acts need to be adapted reg-
ularly, in line with scientific and technical
progress
B.       In the case of directives and regulations, since
they apply immediately in member states
C.      In the case of laws to combat discrimination,
to protect the most vulnerable
D.      In budgetary procedures, to accelerate the
negotiations between institutions
19.      Implementing and Delegated Acts are:
A.      Legislative acts
B.       Adopted under the Ordinary Legislative
Procedure
C.      Non-legislative acts
D.      Regulations and Directives
20.      What is comitology?
A.      The process according to which legislative
files are distributed between committees in
the EU Parliament
B.       A series of procedures which give member
states a say in Implementing and Delegated
Acts
C.      Inter-parliamentary groups of MEPs who
exchange on specific issues, such as animal
welfare or LGBTI
D.      The process by which the Council and EU
Parliament can block a Delegated Act
21.      In the EU’s budgetary procedure, who is the
budgetary authority?
A.      DG BUDG
B.       The EU Commission
C.      The European Parliament and Council
D.      The Court of Auditors
22.      What is the relationship between the multi-
annual financial framework (MFF) and the
EU’s annual budget?
A.      The EU annual budget has to fit within the
expenditure ceilings established in the MFF
B.       There is no relationship, they are indepen-
dent budgets
404
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

C.      The MFF is made up of 7 annual budgets
D.      The annual budget is always higher than the
MFF in case there are expenditures that were
not foreseen when designing the MFF
23.      What is the EU’s multiannual financial
framework (MFF)?
A.      A long-term spending plan that runs for a
period of 10 years and sets out funding for
specific programmes
B.       A long-term spending plan that runs for 5-7
years and sets out the EU’s spending priori-
ties and limits
C.      A spending plan which the EU Parliament is
solely responsible for managing, which it has
to discharge every year
D.      A post-COVID recovery plan of €750 billion,
led by the EU Commission
24.      Which of the following was a main source of
revenue of the 2021-2027 EU budget?
A.      Contributions based on VAT collected by
member states
B.       The Common Consolidated Corporate Tax
Base (CCCTB)
C.      Borrowing from capital markets
D.      European taxes paid directly by citizens
25.      What was the aim of the NextGenerationEU
recovery plan?
A.      To create a permanent fund to help repair the
damage from the pandemic and prevent any
future health crisis
B.       To create a temporary fund with two aims: (i)
to support the pandemic recovery, and (ii) to
support the green and digital transition
C.      To borrow money from the markets to exclu-
sively fund the Green Deal programmes so as
to accelerate the green transition
D.      To permanently fund EU programmes with
€750 billion in all areas of the EU budget,
notably health programmes
26.      What are the two legislative components of
the
Multiannual
Financial
Framework
(MFF)?
A.      The Council Regulation laying down the
MFF and the Council Decision on the system
of Own Resources
B.       The Council Regulation laying down the
MFF and the Regulation for the European
Recovery Instrument
C.      The Interinstitutional Agreement on bud-
getary discipline, cooperation on budgetary
matters and sound financial management
and the Council Regulation laying down the
MFF
D.      The Common Provisions Regulation and the
Council Regulation laying down the MFF
27.      What type of decision allows suspending
payments to an EU member state under the
Rule of law conditionality mechanism to pro-
tect the Union budget?
A.      A delegated act
B.       An implementing decision
C.      A Regulation decision
D.      An oral procedure decision
28.      To finance NextGenerationEU, the EU
Commission borrowed from capital markets,
to provide grants and loans to member states.
Who of the following is responsible for
repaying the loan component?
A.      Multinational companies via a tax
B.       New sources of revenue (new own resources)
C.      The EU Commission
D.      Member states themselves
29.      Approximately what proportion of the total
EU budget is spent on holding European
Parliament plenaries in Strasbourg?
A.      3%
B.       6%
C.      0.1%
D.      1%
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
405

31.      Who makes up the College of the European
Commission?
A.      The EU Commission President and the High
Representative for Foreign Affairs
B.       The President of the Commission, plus eight
Vice-Presidents
C.      One Commissioner per member state (27
Commissioners), led by the Commission
President
D.      A team of 20 Commissioners with indepen-
dent decision-making powers
32.      Which of these are competencies of the EU
Commission?
A.      Manages EU policies and allocates EU fund-
ing
B.       Adopts and amends legislative proposals
C.      Decides on the EU's foreign and security poli-
cies
D.      Decides on the political direction of the EU
and adopts the EU budget
33.      Which of the following is the EU’s indepen-
dent executive arm?
A.      The Court of Justice of the EU
B.       The European Parliament
C.      The Council of the EU
D.      The European Commission
34.      Who decides on the European Commission’s
internal organisation and assigns portfolios
to Commissioners?
A.      The European Parliament President
B.       Member States
C.      The EU Commission President
D.      The President of the Council
35.      According to the EU Commission’s rules of
procedure, which of the following are the
types of internal decision-making proce-
dures?
A.      Oral, written, empowerment, and delegation
procedures
B.       Delegation and implementation procedures
C.      Regular and exceptional procedures
D.      Oral and written procedures, and special case
procedures
36.      What was the effect of the United Kingdom’s
withdrawal from the EU on the number of
seats in the EU Parliament?
A.      There was no change, there are still currently
750 seats
B.       The UK’s 73 seats were redistributed evenly
amongst member states, maintaining the
total of 750 seats
C.      The total seats were decreased to 705, with
some member states gaining seats
406
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
II.  Institutions, other bodies and agencies of the European Union (30 Questions)
30.      What is REACT-EU?
A.      Recovery Assistance for Cohesion and the
Territories of Europe, an initiative delivered
through
the
Coronavirus
Response
Investment Initiative
B.       REACTion to the COVID Pandemic from the
EU, an initiative delivered through the
Coronavirus Response Investment Initiative
C.      REACTion to the COVID Pandemic from the
EU, a programme for specific regions espe-
cially affected by the pandemic
D.      Health
Emergency
Preparedness
and
Reaction, an EU Commission department to
prevent, detect, and rapidly respond to
health emergencies

D.      The 73 British MEPs’ seats were eliminated,
leaving 677 seats in total
37.      How is the number of MEPs per member
state calculated?
A.      By degressive proportionality: no country
can have fewer than 6 or more than 96 MEPs
B.       It is a first-past-the-post electoral system
(FPTP or FPP)
C.      It depends on the European election results
in each Member State, and small countries
always have 5 MEPs to ensure representation
D.      Proportionally to the country’s population
size, plus one MEP for large countries
38.      Where is the official seat of the EU
Parliament?
A.      Strasbourg, Brussels and Luxembourg jointly
B.       Strasbourg
C.      Brussels
D.      There is no official seat
39.      Members of the European Parliament sit in
the chamber according to:
A.      Their nationality
B.       Their election results
C.      Their political affiliation
D.      Their result in the EU elections
40.      The European Parliament elections are held
every 5 years. How long is its President’s
term?
A.      The same duration, 5 years
B.       Half the term, i.e. two-and-a-half years
C.      It is negotiated at the start of the mandate
D.      Two-and-a-half years, which cannot be
renewed
41.      How are the main EU competences divided?
A.      They are binding and non-binding
B.       They are regular or special
C.      This depends on the principle of subsidiarity
D.      They are exclusive, shared or supporting
42.      Which institution adopts the final decision to
conclude international agreements?
A.       It depends on the agreement - for trade it is
the Commission, for others it is the Council
B.       The European Commission
C.      The Council
D.      The EU Parliament
43.      Who attends COREPER II meetings?
A.      Permanent representatives of the member
states who deal with Employment, Social
Policy,
Health
and
Consumer
Affairs;
Competitiveness (Internal Market, Industry,
Research and Space); and Foreign Affairs
B.       Permanent representatives of the Member
States, who deal with General Foreign
Affairs, Economic and Financial, and Justice
and Home Affairs configurations of the
Council
C.      Deputy permanent representatives, prepar-
ing all Council configurations
D.      Permanent representatives, MEPs and civil
society representatives
44.      Who can chair COREPER meetings?
A.      They are always chaired by the delegate of
the country holding the rotating 6-month
presidency of the Council of the EU
B.       They are chaired by the president of the
Council of the EU
C.      An appointed specialist who heads the work-
ing party
D.      They can be chaired by an elected chairper-
son, the rotating 6-month presidency repre-
sentative, by a representative of the High
Representative, or others
45.      Who are members of the European Council?
A.      EU heads of state, exclusively
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
407

B.       EU heads of state or government, and the
Presidents of the European Council and the
Commission
C.      EU heads of state or government, and the
Presidents of all the other EU institutions
D.      EU heads of government, and external guests
invited to their meetings
46.      What is the purpose of the Court of Justice of
the EU?
A.      To provide a forum for judges from the 27
member states to formulate uniform legal
standards in the member states
B.       To act as guardian of the EU Treaties
C.      To support its 3 principal judges in deciding
on cases brought before the Court
D.      To ensure the uniform interpretation of EU
law and that EU countries and institutions
respect the law
47.      What are the two main branches of the CJEU?
A.      The Court of Justice and the General Court
B.       The Court of Auditors and the General Court
C.      The Court of EU judges and the Specialised
Court
D.      The Specialised Court and the General Court
48.      The Court of Justice of the EU is responsible
for dealing with:
A.      Actions brought by an EU country or the
Commission against an EU country for
infringing EU law
B.       Individual or State applications of violations
of the civil rights set out in the European
Convention on Human Rights
C.      Securing the right to life, respect for private
life, and freedom of expression
D.      Applying EU law to a dispute brought by a
referring court
49.      What is the composition of the CJEU?
A.      28 Judges and 28 Counsels
B.       27 Judges
C.      27 Judges and 11 Advocates General
D.      It varies based on the case in question
50.      According to the fundamental principles laid
down in Article 5 of the TEU, what does pro-
portionality mean?
A.      That the EU can only act in so far as member
states have given it the power to do so
B.       That for non-exclusive competences, the EU
may act only if – and in so far as – the objec-
tive of a proposed action cannot be suffi-
ciently achieved by the Member States, but
could be better achieved at EU level
C.      That the content and scope of EU action may
not go beyond what is necessary to achieve
the objectives of the treaties
D.      That the EU must always act proportionally
to the issue at stake
51.      What is a pre-condition for the Council to be
able to vote?
A.      Member states must be represented by a State
Secretary
B.       The chair must be the High Representative of
the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy
C.      A majority of its members must be present
D.      The voting must be unanimous
52.      What is a Council configuration?
A.      It is a type of meeting which is open to the
public
B.       A cross-sector grouping of ministers who
meet informally to discuss overlapping
issues such as health and employment
C.      It is each of the technical formations of minis-
ters, of which there are 10 in total
D.      It is a hierarchical system of Council forma-
tions which take individual decisions in the
name of the Council
53.      How are EU agencies grouped?
A.      Technical and scientific agencies, managerial
agencies and Europol
408
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

B.       Decentralised agencies, executive agencies,
EURATOM and EIT
C.      Technical agencies, EURATOM and EESC
and Committee of the Regions
D.      Technical and scientific agencies, EESC and
Committee of the Regions
54.      What is Europol?
A.      The European Union Agency for Law
Enforcement Cooperation, based in The
Hague
B.       The European Police Office and Drugs Unit,
based in Lyon
C.      The
International
Criminal
Police
Organization, based in Vienna
D.      The European Police Border and Coast
Guard Agency, based in Warsaw
55.      What is the role of EFSA?
A.      It is a part of the European Commission
which provides advice on consumer protec-
tion in relation to food products
B.       It is a decentralised agency which provides
scientific advice on food safety to the EU and
member states
C.      It is an agency with the aim of encouraging
healthy eating by EU consumers
D.      It is an agency with the power to control
which food products go on the market in the
EU
56.      What does EIGE stand for when talking
about EU agencies?
A.      European Innovation Governmental Entity
B.       Economic and Investment Generation
C.      European Initiative for Geothermal Energy
D.      European Institute for Gender Equality

57.      Who has responsibility for control of the EU’s
external borders?
A.      Frontex
B.       Individual member states with an external
border
C.      The EU Commission
D.      It
is
a
shared
responsibility
of
the
Commission and the member states
58.      What is the European Banking Authority
(EBA)?
A.      A department within the European Central
Bank which aims to create Single Rulebook in
banking
B.       An independent agency for regulation and
supervision of the EU banking sector
C.      A subsection of the Committee of European
Banking Supervisors
D.      A European system for financial supervision
run by the European Systemic Risk Board
59.      HERA (Health Emergency Preparedness and
Response Authority), created in the aftermath
of the COVID-19 pandemic, is:
A.      An EU Executive Agency
B.       A new European Commission Directorate-
General
C.      An independent body, similar to the EEAS
D.      An EU decentralised agency
60.      Which are the EU’s common foreign and
security policy agencies?
A.      Frontex, the European Border and Coast
Guard and the EEAS
B.       EEAS, European Union Satellite Centre and
Frontex
C.      European Defence Agency, European Union
Institute for Security Studies, European
Union Satellite Centre
D.      European
Atomic
Energy
Community,
Euratom Supply Agency and EEAS
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
409

61.      What is the Green Deal and the Climate
Law’s intermediate target of reducing net
greenhouse gas emissions?
A.      By at least 55% by 2030, compared to 1990
levels
B.       By at least 55% by 2050, compared to 1990
levels
C.      By at least 55% by 2030, compared to 2000
levels
D.      By at least 65% by 2050, compared to 1990
levels
62.      What is Fit for 55?
A.      A strategy to achieve zero-emission mobility
from old cars by 2055
B.       A directive setting stricter CO2 emission per-
formance standards for old cars and vans
C.      A regulation setting stricter CO2 emission
performance standards for new cars and vans
D.      A strategy to offset all emissions from vehi-
cles
63.      Which of the following is a “Fit for 55” target?
A.      100% CO2 emission reductions for both cars
and vans from 2055
B.       55% CO2 emission reductions for old cars by
2030
C.      55% CO2 emission reductions for new cars by
2030
D.      100% CO2 emission reductions for both new
cars and vans from 2035
64.      Which economic sectors are included in the
EU Green Deal?
A.      Transport, buildings, and agriculture
B.       Agriculture, energy and transport
C.      Transport, finance, agriculture and energy
D.      All sectors
65.      Which of the following is an aim of the EU’s
Better Regulation agenda?
A.      To remove the subsidiarity principle and take
action in new areas
B.       To make EU laws simpler and better
C.      To involve citizens directly in decision-
making via panels held in member states
D.      To eliminate evidence-based policymaking to
ensure legislation is passed more swiftly
66.      Better regulation, described as one of the
most advanced regulatory approaches in the
world, is an objective and responsibility of:
A.      The EU Commission
B.       All the EU institutions
C.      Local and regional authorities
D.      The Council of the EU and the European
Parliament
67.      What is the name of the portal which citizens
can access to participate in the Better regula-
tion agenda?
A.      Consultation process
B.       European Solidarity Corps
C.      European Citizens Initiative
D.      Have your say
68.      What is Regulatory Fitness and Performance
(REFIT) in relation to “Better regulation”?
A.      A programme to make EU law simpler as
well as to reduce unnecessary costs of regula-
tion
B.       A programme to harmonise national legisla-
tion with EU legislation
C.      A group of experts who check whether EU
programmes are delivering the best results at
minimum cost
D.      A toolbox to help the EU Commission carry
out impact assessments
410
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
III. Key policies of the European Union (40 Questions)

69.      What is the internal market of the European
Union?
A.      A market created in 1990 to exchange goods
and services exclusively within the EU
B.       It is another name for the Schengen area
C.      A single market which assures the free move-
ment of goods, services, capital and persons
D.      A single market inside the EU which reduces
tariffs and product inspections
70.      Which of these countries has full access to the
internal market of the EU?
A.      Turkey
B.       Norway
C.      Switzerland
D.      Canada
71.      What is the European Economic Area (EEA)?
A.      The EU market where good, services, capital
and people can move freely
B.       The extension of the EU internal market to
EFTA countries
C.      An area which applies different rules than
the EU internal market
D.      The border-free area which guarantees free
movement to more than 400 million EU citi-
zens
72.      What are the three pillars of the Digital
Single Market?
A.      Sustainability, accessibility and consumer
rights
B.       Access, environment, and economy and soci-
ety
C.      Consumer rights, sustainability and environ-
ment
D.      Access, consumer rights, and sustainability
73.      What is the power of the EU Commission
under competition law?
A.      It intervenes in prices on the national mar-
kets, and can fine companies which do not
comply
B.       It can halt mergers in any circumstance, with-
out the review of the European Courts
because it is a Commission full competence
C.      It monitors and investigates anti-competition
practices, mergers and state aid
D.      It cannot fine companies for using their bar-
gaining power to impose certain conditions
on competitors
74.      Which of the following are the pillars of com-
petition law?
A.      Monitoring of anti-competitive practices
B.       Control of abuse of market power, and con-
trol of take-overs
C.      Free market and use of mergers
D.      The cartel prohibition, the abuse prohibition
and merger control
75.      What is the highest fine for infringement of
EU competition law?
A.      10% of a company’s monthly profit
B.       5% of a company’s annual profit
C.      5% of a company’s revenue
D.      10% of a firm's annual turnover
76.      Who has the primary role in enforcing EU
competition rules?
A.      The Commission Directorate-General (DG)
for Competition plus national authorities
B.       The Commission has sole responsibility for
enforcing EU competition law
C.      The Court of Justice of the EU
D.      The European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF)
77.      Which environmental European Citizens'
Initiative was the first to gather over one mil-
lion signatures?
A.      End the cage age; on animal welfare
B.       Save the bees and farmers
C.      Right2Water, water as a public good
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
411

D.      Ban glyphosate and protect people and the
environment
78.      What is Natura 2000?
A.      A list of 2000 species which are protected
under the EU biodiversity law
B.       A 2000 sq km protected area in Sweden con-
sidered one of the green lungs of the EU
C.      A group of 2000 natural parks across the EU
which citizens can visit for free
D.      A network of areas of high biodiversity value
in the EU
79.      What is the aim of the EU Emissions Trading
System (EU ETS)?
A.      It
is
a
component
of
the
Common
Agricultural Policy which aims to reduce
emissions caused by livestock and crop farm-
ers
B.       It is an EU key tool for reducing greenhouse
gas emissions, which allows buying and sell-
ing emissions from member states or compa-
nies amongst themselves
C.      It is a marketplace for emissions such as
methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O),
which enables the reduction of each partici-
pating company’s contribution towards cli-
mate change
D.      It is a tool to equalise the price of carbon
between domestic products and imports
80.      What is the CAP component which is at the
centre of the EU Green Deal?
A.      Renewable Energy Roadmap
B.       Energy Performance of Buildings Regulation
C.      Farm to Fork Strategy
D.      Sustainable Farmers Initiative
81.      How does the Council usually act in cases of
enlargement policy?
A.      The Foreign Affairs Council usually decides
by qualified majority voting
B.       The General Affairs Council usually decides
by qualified majority voting
C.      The Enlargement Council configuration usu-
ally decides by qualified majority voting
D.      The General Affairs Council usually decides
by unanimity
82.      Which of these cities are the EU accession cri-
teria named after?
A.      Copenhagen
B.       Dublin
C.      Lisbon
D.      Maastricht
83.      What was the largest ever enlargement of the
EC/EU in terms of number of countries?
A.      2004, when 15 new countries joined
B.       2004, when 10 new countries joined
C.      2006, when 10 new countries joined
D.      2001, when 15 new countries joined
84.      When does a candidate country become an
EU member state?
A.      Once negotiations on all policy areas with the
Commission are successfully concluded
B.       After the European Council has given its
approval
C.      Only when the accession treaty has been rat-
ified by all parties
D.      After the European Parliament has given its
consent to the accession treaty
85.      What is the aim of the Digital Markets Act?
A.      To make technology companies carry out risk
assessments
B.       To stop unfair practices by companies acting
as gatekeepers in the digital economy
C.      To target illegal content, non-transparent
advertising, and disinformation
D.      To stop programmed obsolescence of digital
products
412
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

86.      How does the European Commission moni-
tor member states’ overall digital progress?
A.      With the Digital Economy and Society Index
(DESI)
B.       With National Recovery Plans
C.      With the Digital Services Act
D.      With reports from the EU Parliament
87.      In the EU digital economy, what is “interop-
erability”?
A.      It is the name given to monetary transactions
between digital banks
B.       It refers to online platforms where customers
can carry out financial transactions
C.      It is the practice of automatically updating
software programmes
D.      It is the exchange of data and knowledge
between companies
88.      Which organisation has led worldwide nego-
tiations to require multinational companies,
including digital platforms, to pay a mini-
mum level of taxes in countries where they
operate?
A.      The Group of Five (G5)
B.       The European Council
C.      The OECD
D.      The European Tax Platform
89.      Which EU law sets out the criteria and mech-
anisms for determining which EU country is
responsible for examining an asylum appli-
cation?
A.      The Dublin Regulation
B.       The Copenhagen Regulation
C.      The Schengen Criteria
D.      The Maastricht Treaty
90.      How do EU countries organise their migra-
tion and asylum efforts?
A.      Based on binding quotas
B.       Based on solidarity
C.      Based on member states’ capacity
D.      Based on member states’ competence
91.      What did the EU activate to help Ukrainians
fleeing the 2022 Russian invasion?
A.      The EU compulsory resettlement scheme
B.       The Safety and Asylum Protocol
C.      A new law on Ukrainian refugees
D.      The Temporary Protection Directive
92.      Which EU Commission Directorate-General
is in charge of Migration and Asylum?
A.      EEAS
B.       DG HOME
C.      DG NEAR
D.      DG MA
93.      What is the EU taxonomy?
A.      A classification system, establishing a list of
environmentally sustainable economic activi-
ties, which includes specific nuclear and gas
energy activities
B.       A taxation system for energy consumption in
the EU aimed at reducing CO2 emissions
C.      A classification system, establishing a list of
environmentally sustainable economic activi-
ties, which excludes all nuclear and gas
energy activities
D.      A taxation system for energy consumption in
the EU which is a component of the EU Green
Deal
94.      What is REPowerEU?
A.      An EU Parliament proposal to promote
liqueified natural gas from the US
B.       An EU Commission plan to reduce depen-
dency, save, and promote sustainable energy
C.      A European Citizens initiative aiming at
reducing consumer prices for energy
D.      An exception in Spain and Portugal to cap
the price of gas, thereby lowering power
prices for end users compared with other EU
countries
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
413

95.      In terms of total EU energy consumption,
how much do buildings consume?
A.      90% of the total
B.       20% of the total
C.      35% of the total
D.      40% of the total
96.      What did the EU Commission call its pro-
posal in 2022 for a European Gas Demand
Reduction
Plan
and
a
new
Council
Regulation
on
Coordinated
Demand
Reduction Measures for Gas?
A.      Safe energy and a safe winter
B.       Save gas for a safe winter
C.      NextGeneration RePowered
D.      NextGenerationEU
97.      What is the name of the EU’s doctoral and
postdoctoral reference programme?
A.      Albert Einstein Programme
B.       Copernicus+
C.      Erasmus scholarship programme
D.      Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions
98.      What is Horizon Europe?
A.      An EU plan to protect nature and reverse the
degradation of ecosystems
B.       A specific protected area of biodiversity in
the EU
C.      A large EU funding programme for research
and innovation
D.      An investigation scheme funded by the EU to
support Covid-19 vaccine research
99.      Which of the following was set up by the EU
Commission to support research and innova-
tion policy?
A.      The European Research Executive Agency
B.       The Marie Curie Agency for Investigation
C.      The Altiero Spinelli Innovation Hub
D.      The European SciTech Catalyst Agency
100.    What is the European Innovation Council?
A.      A
Council
configuration
who
discuss
research and innovation
B.       A flagship innovation programme for break-
through technologies
C.      A Directorate-General of the EU Commission
dedicated to Innovation
D.      A Commission collaboration with industry
created in the aftermath of the pandemic to
accelerate innovations in medical science
414
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

1. C
The “Ordinary Legislative Procedure”, or OLP, is the general rule used to pass legislation at EU level, cov-
ering the vast majority of policy areas. It begins with a legislative proposal from the European
Commission, which subsequently goes through up to three readings between the European Parliament
and Council of the European Union, the co-legislators with an equal footing in negotiations. Reference:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/decision-making/ordinary-legislative-procedure/
2. A
The co-decision procedure was introduced originally in 1992 and was extended in 1999. Under the Lisbon
Treaty, it was officially named the Ordinary Legislative Procedure. It applies to almost all areas of action
of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). Reference:
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/olp/en/ordinary-legislative-procedure/overview
3. B
The European Commission has been given the right of initiative in order to carry out its role as guardian
of the treaties. It can propose European legislation on policy areas contained in the treaties, as well as in
areas where it considers it is necessary. The Council and EU Parliament can call on the Commission to
propose legislation, and the European Citizens initiative enables citizens to do so as well. Reference:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/right-of-
initiative.html#:~:text=To%20enable%20it%20to%20play,because%20the%20Commission%20considers%20it
4. D
The Ordinary Legislative Procedure has three main stages, although it can end after the first or second
stage. These three stages are: 1) A first reading by the European Parliament, followed by the Council. 2) A
second reading by the same institutions. 3) If there is no agreement, a Conciliation Committee and third
reading. Most legislative files are in practice adopted in the first reading. Reference:
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/olp/en/ordinary-legislative-procedure/overview
5. B
The European Parliament votes by simple majority at the first and third readings. At the second reading, it
votes by majority of MEPs. Reference: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/voting-system/
Q6. D
Depending on the legislative file being discussed, the Council of the EU takes its decisions by: a) simple
majority (14 member states vote in favour); b) qualified majority (55% of member states, representing at
least 65% of the EU population, vote in favour); c) unanimous vote (all votes are in favour). Reference:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/voting-system/
Q7. A
In relation to the Ordinary Legislative Procedure, a trilogue is an informal negotiation bringing together
representatives of the European Parliament, the Council of the European Union and the European
Commission with the objective of achieving a provisional agreement that the co-legislators can accept.
415
ANSWERS

This informal agreement must still be adopted following formal procedures. Reference: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/trilogue.html
Q8. B
Before the first reading in the EU’s Ordinary Legislative Procedure, the Council may adopt a “general
approach”, which is a political agreement document that can help to give the European Parliament an idea
of its position on the Commission's legislative proposal. A general approach can facilitate reaching an
agreement between the two institutions. Reference: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/decision-
making/ordinary-legislative-procedure/
Q9. D
The correct answer is no, as neither the EU Parliament nor the Council is subject to a time limit by which
they must conclude the first reading. Reference: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/olp/en/ordinary-legislative-pro-
cedure/overview
Q10. A
A rapporteur is an MEP who is responsible for handling a legislative proposal by the European
Commission. They lead interinstitutional negotiations regarding their legislative file and handle the dis-
cussions in the respective EP committee as well as in plenary. Reference:
https://www.eumonitor.eu/9353000/1/j9vvik7m1c3gyxp/vhcmdex0ovsn
Q11. A
The Special Legislative Procedure means that the only legislator is the Council, instead of the co-decision
with the EU Parliament on legislative proposals made by the Commission, now known as the Ordinary
Legislative Procedure. Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/special-legislative-proce-
dure.html
Q12. D
Article 289(2) of the TFEU provides that, for certain cases, the Council is the only legislator and the
Parliament is required to either consent to the Commission’s proposal or be consulted on it. Reference:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/special-legislative-procedure.html
Q13. C
In the case of a legislative procedure, the EU Parliament’s consent is required when new legislation on
combating discrimination is adopted. In relation to a non-legislative procedure, its consent is required
when: the Council adopts certain international agreements negotiated by the EU; in cases of a serious
breach of fundamental rights (Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union); for the accession of new EU
members; and arrangements for withdrawal from the EU. Reference:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/decision-making/special-legislative-procedures/
Q14. D
There are two main types of EU law: primary and secondary. The starting point is the EU Treaties, known
as primary law. Secondary law is the body of law which derives from primary law, and includes regula-
tions, directives, decisions, recommendations and opinions. Reference: https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-
making-process/types-eu-law_en
416
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

Q15. B
Regulations are legal acts which have general application, are entirely binding and are directly applicable
in all EU member states. Regulations are a part of EU secondary law. They are defined by Article 288 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).  Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-
content/glossary/regulation.html
Q16. A
Transposition is the process according to which member states incorporate EU directives into their
national laws. It applies to directives, since they are not directly applicable in member states, unlike regu-
lations and decisions. The EU member states must adopt these national laws within a deadline, set out in
the directive, and must notify their implementing measures to the European Commission. If the member
state does not adopt said national laws, or if the measures are unsatisfactory, the Commission may take a
case to the Court of Justice of the European Union. Reference: EUR-Lex - transposition - EN - EUR-Lex
(europa.eu)
Q17. D
Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) stipulated that the European
Union legislator may grant powers to the Commission through specific rules inscribed into a legislative
act to adopt “delegated acts”. Delegated acts are “non-legislative acts adopted by the European
Commission that serve to amend or supplement the non-essential elements of the legislation”. Reference:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/delegated-acts.html
Q18. A
Delegated acts are typically used when legislative acts, including their annexes, must be adapted on a reg-
ular basis to take into consideration technical and scientific progress. Reference: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/delegated-acts.html
Q19. C
Article 289 of the TFEU stipulates that “non-legislative acts are decisions that are adopted, generally by
the European Commission, following delegation (delegated acts) or in order to implement a legislative act
(implementing acts)”; whereas “legislative acts are decisions adopted under the ordinary or a special leg-
islative procedure”. Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:nonlegisla-
tive_acts
Q20. B
In order to assure that an EU law is applied uniformly across the EU, the Commission can adopt an
Implementing Act, which is a non-legislative act usually of an administrative or technical nature. In this
context, comitology refers to the series of procedures that give member states a say in these Implementing
Acts; for example, comitology includes meetings of representative committees. Reference:  https://commis-
sion.europa.eu/law/law-making-process/adopting-eu-law/implementing-and-delegated-acts/comitology_en#:~:text=
EU%20laws%20sometimes%20authorise%20the,say%20in%20the%20implementing%20acts
Q21. C
Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, the EU Parliament and the Council together form the
budgetary authority. This was not always the case: before 1970, the Council had all powers related to the
budget and the EU Parliament had a solely consultative role. Each treaty revision introduced substantial
modifications until the 2009 Lisbon Treaty put forward budgetary co-decision. Reference:
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
417

https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/10/the-budgetary-
procedure#:~:text=The%20exercise%20of%20budgetary%20powers,adoption%20of%20the%20budget%20
Q22. A
The EU’s annual budgets must fit within the expenditure limits (ceilings) set in the multiannual financial
framework (the EU's long-term budget). The annual budget is generally set at a lower level, in case there
is unforeseen expenditure, and the annual budget can ensure that the EU is able to finance its spending.
Reference: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/the-eu-budget/eu-annual-budget/
Q23. B
The EU adopts long-term spending plans, known as multiannual financial frameworks (MFFs), that run
for a period of 5-7 years. The long-term budget sets out the EU’s spending priorities and limits. The
Commission, the Council and European Parliament all have a say in determining the size of the budget
and how it is allocated, and its size and priorities are shaped politically by the European Council.
However, the Commission is responsible for managing the budget. Reference: https://european-
union.europa.eu/institutions-law-budget/budget/spending_en
Q24. A
The main sources of revenue for the 2021-2027 EU budget were: customs duties, contributions based on
the Value Added Tax (VAT) collected by Member States, and direct contributions by EU countries (known
as Gross National Income-based contributions as well). Moreover, since January 2021, there is a new
source of revenue: a contribution based on the non-recycled plastic packaging waste. Reference:
https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/eu-budget/motion/today_en
Q25. B
NextGenerationEU (the words in the name have been run into each other) is a temporary European Union
€750 billion financial instrument created to help repair the immediate economic and social damage in the
aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic in the short-term, and to support economic recovery in the long-
term and build a greener and more digital future. To finance NextGenerationEU, the European
Commission, on behalf of the EU, borrowed on the capital markets. Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:next_generation_eu
Q26. A
According to the Council Regulation laying down the multiannual financial framework for the years 2021
to 2027: The long-term EU budget (MFF), reinforced by the financing authorised by the Own Resources
Decision in favour of the European Union Recovery Instrument, are the main legislative tools. Reference:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020PC0443
Q27. B
In December 2022, ambassadors of the EU member states recommended the Council to adopt an imple-
menting decision under the conditionality regulation to impose measures for the protection of the Union
budget against the consequences of breaches of the principles of the rule of law. Reference:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2022/12/12/rule-of-law-conditionality-
mechanism/#:~:text=The%20conditionality%20regulation%20is%20aimed,financial%20interests%20of%20the%20
Union.
418
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

Q28. D
To finance NextGenerationEU, the EU Commission borrowed up to €806.9 billion from capital markets, to
be repaid over a long-term period, until 2058, with member states themselves repaying the loan compo-
nent of the instrument. To help with the repayments of the grants under NextGenerationEU, the
Commission proposed new own resources. Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:next_generation_eu
Q29. C
According to data from a 2013 study by the European Parliament, €103 million could be saved every year
should all EP operations be carried out in Brussels. This amount corresponds to 6% of the EU Parliament’s
budget, 1% of the EU’s administrative budget, and 0.1% of the total EU budget. Reference:
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/faq/18/why-does-parliament-move-between-brussels-and-strasbourg
Q30. A
REACT-EU (Recovery Assistance for Cohesion and the Territories of Europe) is an initiative that extends
the Coronavirus Response Investment Initiative Plus initiatives, by continuing the contribution towards a
green, digital and resilient economy in the long-term, after the pandemic. Reference:
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_20_948
Q31. C
The European Commission is led by a College of 27 Commissioners (one from each EU country, including
the Commission President). The Commission President decides which Commissioner is responsible for
each policy area. Decisions are taken based on collective responsibility, so all Commissioners are equal in
deciding and being accountable for the College’s decisions. They generally do not have any individual
decision-making powers. Reference:  https://european-union.europa.eu/institutions-law-budget/institutions-and-
bodies/institutions-and-bodies-profiles/european-commission_en#:~:text=The%20College%20of%20Commissioners
%20is,each%20responsible%20for%20a%20portfolio.
Q32. A
The Commission helps to shape the EU's strategy, proposes new EU legislation and policies, monitors
their implementation and manages the EU budget. Legislation is adopted and amended by the EU
Parliament and the Council of the EU. The broad parameters of political direction and foreign policy are to
a large degree set by the European Council and implemented by the Council and Commission. Reference:
https://european-union.europa.eu/institutions-law-budget/institutions-and-bodies/institutions-and-bodies-profiles
/european-commission_en#:~:text=The%20College%20of%20Commissioners%20is,each%20responsible
%20for%20a%20portfolio.
Q33. D
The European Commission is the EU's politically independent executive arm. It alone is responsible for
drawing up proposals for new European legislation, and it implements the decisions of the European
Parliament and the Council of the EU. Reference:  https://european-union.europa.eu/institutions-law-
budget/institutions-and-bodies/institutions-and-bodies-profiles/european-commission_en#:~:text=The%20College
%20of%20Commissioners%20is,each%20responsible%20for%20a%20portfolio.
Q34. C
The President of the Commission sets out the political guidelines for the Commission, decides on its inter-
nal organisation and assigns portfolios to the Commissioners. The responsibilities of individual
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
419

Commissioners may change during the course of the Commission’s mandate (5 years). Reference:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/rules-of-procedure-of-the-european-commission.html
Q35. A
There are 4 types of internal decision-making procedures in the EU Commission:
–       Oral procedure: the Commission takes decisions (such as political or economic decisions) during its
ordinary or extraordinary meetings via this procedure.
–       Written procedure: these are adopted when Commissioners do not express reservations or request
changes to a draft proposal within a specific time limit.
–       Empowerment procedure: the Commission empowers one or several members of the Commission to
manage a situation on its behalf.
–       Delegation procedure: the Commission delegates the power to adopt certain measures to directors-
general or heads of service of behalf of the Institution. Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-
content/summary/rules-of-procedure-of-the-european-commission.html
Q36. C
The total number of parliamentary seats was reduced from 751 to 705. As this reduction in total was less
than the 73 seats that had been held by the UK, it meant that some Member States saw their number of
seats increased. Reference: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/20/the-european-parliament-organi-
sation-and-operation
Q37. A
The number of MEPs for each member states is to some degree proportionate to its population, but
degressive proportionality is used: no country can have fewer than 6 or more than 96 MEPs; and the total
number of MEPs cannot exceed 705 (704 plus the President), a number which changed following Brexit
(previously 750 MEPs). This system means that, to ensure they have an adequate voice, less populous
countries are over-represented, in strictly proportional terms, compared with the countries with larger
populations. Reference: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/20/the-european-parliament-organisa-
tion-and-operation
Q38. B
The European Council confirmed in 1992 (what was already by then the practical reality) that the
European Parliament has three principal places of work: Strasbourg (its official seat), Brussels and
Luxembourg. In 1997 the arrangement was incorporated into the EU treaty. Reference:
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/faq/18/why-does-parliament-move-between-brussels-and-strasbourg
Q39. C
The Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament decides how MEPs will sit at the start of each
legislative term. Over the past terms, political groups, made up of loosely affiliated similar political parties
from different member states, have been put together like wedges in a pie chart. Reference:
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/faq/2/seating-in-the-chamber
Q40. B
The President of the European Parliament is elected for a renewable term of two and a half years, i.e. half
the Parliament’s mandate. The President represents the European Parliament to the outside world and
also in its relations with the other EU institutions. Reference: https://the-president.europarl.europa.eu/en/the-
presidency/functions
420
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

Q41. D
The Treaty of Lisbon defines the division of competences between the EU and its member states. These
competences are divided into three main categories:
–        exclusive competences of the EU (the EU alone can legislate)
–        shared competences (the EU and member states legislate)
–        supporting competences (the EU can only intervene to support member states)
Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/division-of-competences-within-the-european-
union.html
Q42. C
The Council adopts the final decision to conclude agreements (negotiated on behalf of the EU by the
Commission) between the EU and non-EU countries and international organisations, once the Parliament
has given its consent, and it has been ratified by all EU member states. Reference: https://www.consilium.
europa.eu/en/council-eu/
Q43. B
The work of the Council is prepared by the Committee of Permanent Representatives of the Member
States (Coreper). Coreper is divided into:
–        Coreper II, composed of the permanent representatives of the governments of the Member States,
deals with items relating to the General Affairs, Foreign Affairs, Economic and Financial Affairs and
Justice and Home Affairs configurations of the Council
–        Coreper I, composed of the deputy permanent representatives, prepares all other Council configura-
tions. Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/council-of-the-european-union.html
Q44. D
These meetings can be chaired by an appointed or elected chairperson, the delegate of the country holding
the rotating 6-month presidency of the Council, by a representative of the High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy or by the General Secretariat of the Council. Reference:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/council-preparatory-bodies.html
Q45. B
The members of the European Council are the heads of state or government of the 27 EU member states,
the European Council President and the President of the European Commission. Reference:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/european-council/
Q46. D
The purpose of the Court of Justice of the European Union is to ensure the uniform interpretation of EU
law and that EU countries and institutions respect the law. The Court is composed of 27 judges (1 from
each EU country) and 11 advocates-general, who present opinions on cases brought before the Court. They
are appointed by common accord of EU countries for 6 years. (It is the European Commission that has the
role of guardian of the treaties.)  Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/court-of-
justice.html
Q47. A
The CJEU has 2 branches:
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
421

–       The Court of Justice: mainly gives preliminary rulings, hears some actions against EU institutions
brought by EU countries and takes appeals from the General Court.
–       The General Court: has jurisdiction to hear actions against EU institutions brought by citizens and,
in some instances, other EU countries. Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-
content/glossary/court-of-justice-of-the-european-union.html
Q48. A
 The Court is responsible for dealing with:
–        references for preliminary rulings from national courts on interpretation of EU law
–        actions brought by an EU country or the Commission against an EU country for infringing EU law
–        some actions brought by an EU country for annulment of a measure adopted by an EU institution
–        actions against an EU institution for failure to act
–        appeals on points of law against judgments of the General Court
The CJEU does not apply EU law to a dispute brought by a referring court. Its role is only to help resolve
these. It is the (non-EU) European Court of Human Rights that has jurisdiction in respect of the European
Convention on Human Rights, to which non-EU states are also parties. Reference: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/court-of-justice.html
Q49. C
The Court of Justice is composed of 27 Judges and 11 Advocates General. The Judges and Advocates
General are appointed by agreement of the governments of the Member States after consultation of a
responsible panel. They are appointed for a renewable term of six years. Reference:
https://curia.europa.eu/jcms/jcms/Jo2_7024/en/
Q50. C
As set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union:
–        Proportionality: The content and scope of EU action may not go beyond what is necessary to achieve
the objectives of the treaties.
–        Subsidiarity: In the area of its non-exclusive competences, the EU may act only if – and in so far as –
the objective of a proposed action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States but could be
better achieved at EU level. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/summary/division-of-competences-
within-the-european-union.html
Q51. C
Council meetings are attended by representatives from each member state at a ministerial level.
Participants can therefore be ministers or state secretaries. They have the right to commit the government
of their country and cast its vote. European Commissioners responsible for the areas concerned are also
invited to Council meetings. The Council can only vote if a majority of its members is present. Reference:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/configurations/
Q52. C
The Council of the EU is a single legal entity, but it meets in 10 different “configurations”, depending on
the subject being discussed. There is no hierarchy among the Council configurations, although the General
Affairs Council and the Foreign Affairs Council have special roles. Reference:
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/configurations/
422
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

Q53. B
EU agencies are set up by the EU to carry out specific technical, scientific or administrative tasks. They are
divided into 4 groups:
–        Decentralised agencies
–        Executive agencies
–        European Atomic Energy Community Treaty (EURATOM) agencies
–        European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT). Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-
content/glossary/european-union-agencies.html
Q54. A
Europol is an EU agency that seeks to assist member state (and other) police authorities and law enforce-
ment services in preventing and combatting international organised crime and terrorism. It was estab-
lished in The Hague in 1999, became a full EU agency in 2010 and given wider powers and its present
name in 2017.   Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/europol-european-union-agency-for-
law-enforcement-cooperation.html
Q55. B
The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), in Parma, Italy, is an EU decentralised agency that provides
independent scientific advice on food-related risks. This advice informs European laws and rules, and
therefore helps protect consumers. Its remit covers:
–        food and feed safety
–        nutrition
–        animal health and welfare
–        plant protection
–        plant health.
Reference: https://european-union.europa.eu/institutions-law-budget/institutions-and-bodies/institutions-and-
bodies-profiles/efsa_en
Q56. D
The European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) is an EU decentralised agency which supports efforts
to bring about gender equality in the EU. It is based in Vilnius (Lithuania). Reference: https://eige.europa.eu/
Q57. B
Member states that have an external border have total responsibility for border control. However, the
European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) increasingly provides additional practical support
for EU countries in managing the EU’s external borders in respect of challenges such as cross-border crime
and migratory pressures. Reference: https://european-union.europa.eu/institutions-law-budget/institutions-and-
bodies/institutions-and-bodies-profiles/frontex_en
Q58. B
The European Banking Authority (EBA) is an independent EU authority based in Paris which works to
ensure effective and consistent regulation and supervision across the EU banking sector. Its overall aims
are to maintain financial stability in the EU and to safeguard the orderly functioning of the banking sector.
It is one of the mechanisms set up in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crash. Reference: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/european-banking-authority-eba.html
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
423

Q59. B
The Health Emergency Preparedness and Response (HERA) department’s mission is to prevent, detect,
and rapidly respond to health emergencies. It was launched as a new European Commission Directorate-
General on 16 September 2021. Reference: https://health.ec.europa.eu/health-emergency-preparedness-and-
response-hera_en
Q60. C
The EU has set up 3 agencies to carry out very clearly defined technical, scientific and management tasks
related to the common foreign and security policy, including the common security and defence policy, and
other aspects of EU external action. These are:
–        European Defence Agency
–        European Union Institute for Security Studies
–        European Union Satellite Centre
Reference: https://european-union.europa.eu/institutions-law-budget/institutions-and-bodies/types-institutions-and-
bodies_en#:~:text=The%20EU%20institutions%20and%20bodies,into%20realities%20on%20the%20ground.
Q61. A
The European Climate Law establishes by law the European Green Deal’s aim for the EU’s economy and
society to become climate-neutral by 2050. This law establishes the intermediate target of reducing net
greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels.
Reference:https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/european-green-deal/european-climate-law_en
Q62. C
“Fit for 55” is an EU regulation setting stricter CO2 emission performance standards for new cars and
vans. The new rules aim to reduce emissions from road transport, given that it has the highest share of
emissions in the sector. Reference: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/03/28/fit-for-55-
council-adopts-regulation-on-co2-emissions-for-new-cars-and-vans/
Q63. D
The “Fit for 55” rules set the following targets:
–        55% CO2 emission reductions for new cars and 50% for new vans from 2030 to 2034 compared to
2021 levels
–        100% CO2 emission reductions for both new cars and vans from 2035
 Reference: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/03/28/fit-for-55-council-adopts-regula-
tion-on-co2-emissions-for-new-cars-and-vans/
Q64. D
All sectors of the economy are involved in the EU Green Deal. Some sectors (transport, buildings, agricul-
ture and energy) have a larger role, but sectors like finance will have a different role in directing private
capital towards more sustainable investments. Reference:
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/QANDA_19_6690
Q65. B
Objectives of the Better Regulation agenda are:
–        Ensuring EU policymaking is based on evidence
424
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST

–        Making EU laws simpler and better, and avoiding unnecessary burdens
–        Involving citizens, businesses and stakeholders in the decision-making process
The principles of subsidiarity and proportionality are cornerstones of the EU treaties and are systemati-
cally applied to the Commission’s legislative proposals. Reference: https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-
making-process/planning-and-proposing-law/better-regulation_en
Q66. B
Better regulation is a shared objective and responsibility of all EU institutions. The European Parliament
and the Council will be consulted regarding their efforts to assess and monitor the impact of EU legisla-
tion and EU spending programmes. Cooperation with local, regional and national authorities, and social
partners on EU policymaking will also be a part of this initiative. Reference:
https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2021-04/better_regulation_joining_forces_to_make_better_laws_en_0.pdf
Q67. D
In the “Have Your Say” portal, citizens can share their views on Commission initiatives. Anyone can pro-
pose suggestions for the simplification of existing EU laws via the portal.
Reference:https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-making-process/planning-and-proposing-law/better-
regulation_en#have-your-say--share-your-views-and-ideas
Q68. A
The Regulatory Fitness and Performance (REFIT) programme was established in 2012 to make EU laws
simpler and to reduce unnecessary costs of regulation while still achieving their objectives. Revision and
evaluation of EU laws always consider the potential for simplification and burden reduction. Reference:
https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-making-process/planning-and-proposing-law/better-regulation_en#have-your-
say--share-your-views-and-ideas
Q69. C
The internal market of the European Union is a single market which assures the free movement of goods,
services, capital and persons. A country can be in the EU's single market without being a member state of
the EU. This is the case with Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. Reference: https://eealaw.efta.int/
Q70. B
The single market includes both EU and non-EU countries: Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway take part
through the European Economic Area they have established with the EU. Switzerland has several bilateral
agreements with the EU that give it partial access to the single market. Through the EEA Agreement,
Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein are equal partners in the internal market together with EU member
states. Reference: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/economy/20230112STO66302/30-years-of-eu-
single-market-benefits-and-challenges-infographics
Q71. B
The European Economic Area (EEA) extends the internal market of the EU to the three participating EFTA
States. All relevant internal market legislation is integrated into the EEA Agreement, so it applies to the
whole area. Reference: European Economic Area (EEA) / Relations with the EU | European Free Trade
Association (efta.int)
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST
425

Q72. B
The EU’s Digital Single Market Strategy is built on three pillars:
–        Access: better access for consumers and businesses to digital goods and services across Europe
–        Environment: creating the right conditions and a level playing field for digital networks and innova-
tive services to flourish
–        Economy & Society: maximising the growth potential of the digital economy
Reference: https://eufordigital.eu/discover-eu/eu-digital-single-market/
Q73. C
The European Commission monitors and investigates anti-competition practices, mergers and state aid to
ensure a level playing field for EU businesses, while guaranteeing choice and fair pricing for consumers.
Reference: https://european-union.europa.eu/priorities-and-actions/actions-topic/competition_en
Q74. D
The pillars of competition law are: prohibition of anti-competitive agreements (the "cartel prohibition"),
prohibition of abuse of market power (the "abuse prohibition") and regulation of mergers and take-overs
("merger control"). Reference: https://www.uio.no/studier/emner/jus/jus/JUS5310/#:~:text=Competition
%20law%20contains%20three%20%22pillars,(%22Merger%20Control%22).
Q75. D
The maximum fine for infringement may be as high as 10% of a firm's annual turnover. Reference:
https://competition-policy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2021-01/factsheet_fines_en.pdf
Q76. A
The European Commission, together with the national competition authorities, directly enforces EU com-
petition rules, to make EU markets work better, by ensuring that all companies compete equally and fairly
on their merits. Within the Commission, the Directorate-General (DG) for Competition is primarily
responsible for these direct enforcement powers. Reference: https://commission.europa.eu/about-european-com-
mission/departments-and-executive-agencies/competition_en
Q77. C
Right2Water was the first European Citizens' Initiative gathering the required number of signatories. It
was submitted to the Commission on 20/12/2013.  Reference: https://europa.eu/citizens-
initiative/initiatives/details/2012/000003/water-and-sanitation-are-human-right-water-public-good-not-
commodity_en
Q78. D
Natura 2000 is an EU network of areas of high biodiversity value. It is the largest coordinated network of
protected areas globally and accounts for almost one fifth of the EU’s land area, extending over 250 000
km. Reference: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:natura
Q79. B
An emissions trading system is a market mechanism that allows those who emit greenhouse gases to buy
and sell these emissions (as permits or allowances) amongst themselves. The EU ETS covers almost half of
the emissions from the European economy and applies not only to the EU member states but also to the
426
THE EU KNOWLEDGE TEST