======================================================================
THE WRITTEN TEST (CASE STUDY)
======================================================================

10. The Written Test (Case Study)
Written tests are expected to feature in most competitions in the form of a case study.
In a case study, candidates are asked to analyse a problem, interpret data, consider the
various options and make recommendations.
The case study is an established method of EPSO testing, though previously it has
been part of the now abolished Assessment Centre (though for logistical reasons typi-
cally administered separately from the physical Assessment centre).
Some key points
This is another computer-based test like all the other tests up to the establishment of
the Reserve List. However, there are some very important differences from the verbal,
numerical and abstract reasoning tests we have covered in detail in previous chapters.
First, while everyone’s reasoning tests will be marked, your written test will only be
evaluated if you have passed the other tests.
Second, the verbal, numerical and abstract reasoning tests do not require knowledge
of how the EU works to answer them. Your case study in contrast will most likely be
based on an EU-related scenario (specific to the field of the competition, other than for
generalists) where it will be a significant benefit to be familiar with EU terminology and
how the institutions work, and in making your analysis to be aware of which approaches
are likely to be acceptable and workable and which will not.
Third, the written test is intended to measure your strengths in some of the general
competencies we discussed in Chapter 1, most obviously your ability to communicate in
writing and your abilities in critical thinking, analysing and creative problem-solving.
Fourth, while the reasoning tests will be available in all 24 official languages, the writ-
ten test will only be in the languages specified by EPSO for the competition according to
what the institutions require. In other words, you will likely be doing this test in your
second language.
Fifth, while the reasoning tests are in the form of multiple choice questions, the writ-
ten test will be marked by human beings. What you produce will be marked against a
pre-determined scoring guide to aim at as an objective assessment as possible, but
inevitably subtleties of judgement will come into play and how well, systematically and
convincingly you marshall your arguments will be a factor. The markers will be special-
ists in your field themselves, so you must demonstrate to them that you have really
understood the questions that are asked and that you can come up with acceptable and
realistic solutions or recommendations that they find convincing.
Sixth, how the written tests will be scored is not yet known, so make sure to refer to
the Notice of Competition.

Which general competencies may be assessed?
As explained in Chapter 1, with the abolition of the formal Assessment Centre the
assessment of candidates against the Competency Framework will only partly be done
during the EPSO selection process, with the evaluation of the remaining competencies
optional for each recruiting service. EPSO itself will not be running any assessments
beyond the reserve list but may provide operational support or training to the institu-
tions.
What is left of assessment of general competencies pre-Reserve List is the Written Test
and EPSO has said this may test four general competencies.
What does this mean for you as a candidate? In the old system your general compe-
tencies were tested by a very rigorous system of multiple exercises with each compe-
tency being assessed in at least two exercises and by more than one assessor. In a day at
the Assessment Centre every aspect of how you analysed problems, interacted with
people, showed decision-making skills and communicated, both orally and in writing,
could be seen. With the Written Test now the only format for assessing your competen-
cies pre-Reserve List, this means there is a lot of pressure to do well in this test.
In its presentations on the new system EPSO has said that four general competencies
may be assessed in the written test. You need therefore to be conscious of what these are
when you are preparing for the test and when you are writing your essay.
1. Critical thinking, analysing and creative problem solving
“Thinks holistically and translates complex information into creative and innovative
solutions.”
EPSO lists the “anchors” (i.e. the observable behaviours through which the compe-
tency is demonstrated) as being the following:
● Differentiates the essential from less crucial elements and manages to integrate
information coming from different sources
● Identifies possible ways forward taking a range of points of view and positions into
consideration
● Manages complex information and concepts well
● Establishes connections between elements that go beyond their own area of respon-
sibility and the here and now. Anticipates possible impact with regard to the bigger
picture
● Generates original ideas and innovative solutions to problems by thinking out-of-
the-box
2. Decision-making and getting results
“Takes decisions in a shifting environment, translates them into action and works
towards tangible results.”
For this the anchors are:
● Takes decisions, even when confronted with unknown circumstances or incomplete
information
● Comes to an informed decision, checking the advantages and disadvantages of dif-
ferent alternatives
382
THE WRITTEN TEST

● Adopts a practical course of action: flexibly adapts and chooses the most opportune
action considering the situation
● Proactively suggests action and solutions on their own initiative
● Proposes targeted action in order to achieve tangible results for the set objectives
3. Communication
“Conveys information and opinions clearly, generates buy-in by facilitating interac-
tion and engaging effectively with others.”
For this the anchors are:
● Conveys information and opinions clearly and concisely (verbally as well as in writ-
ing)
● Tailors the message to respond to the needs of the person or persons with which
they are communicating
● Uses convincing arguments and solid reasoning to put the message across
● Takes into account the point of view of others
● Communicates in ways that generate buy-in and create a win-win situation for the
parties involved
4. Intrapreneurship
“Drives change, inspires and empowers others in implementing change and offers
guidance at all levels.”
● Demonstrates initiative, removes barriers and thinks ahead
● Takes on new challenges and initiates change, takes the lead when required
● Inspires and encourages others to take action and move ahead
● Guides and empowers others in order to grow and better their performance
● Acts as a role model and an ambassador for the department
   It is pretty obvious that some of these competencies can be better assessed in a Written
Test than others. For example, oral communication by definition cannot be assessed in a
written test so in the case study it is only your written communication skills (drafting
skills) that are measured.  In contrast, critical thinking, analysing and creative problem
solving can be more fully demonstrated. The degree to which “Intrapreneurship” char-
acteristics, like inspiring others and leadership traits, can be measured in a written essay
is rather open to question.
Indicators for the competencies
What are known as “indicators” are used to measure how you perform against each
of the competencies. These indicators can be either positive or negative.
Existing EPSO practice is that markers will look at all these indicators in your essay
and justify their scores by listing the indicators they found. In practice, they have a clear
set of instructions or questions to answer when giving their assessment. This is put in a
THE WRITTEN TEST
383

384
THE WRITTEN TEST
“Scoring Guide”, a booklet the markers receive along with a training course they must
follow when enlisting for a given competition.
So what sort of indicators for the competencies would be relevant for the competen-
cies above as demonstrated in the written test?
POSITIVE Indicators
•
Follows guidelines and instructions
•
Copes well with complexity
•
Challenges data (by comparing multiple sources of information)
•
Identifies the root of the problem (by trying look beneath the surface)
•
Sets realistic deadlines and milestones (in the essay itself and in the writing

process)
•
Considers multiple options (and does not say only one option alone is possible)
•
Suggests creative solutions
•
Makes practical and workable suggestions
•
Conveys key points of arguments (and does not get lost in the details)
•
Writes clearly and fluently
•
Writes without spelling or grammatical errors
•
Writes for the right audience (which is usually indicated in the instructions)
•
Makes good use of examples
NEGATIVE Indicators
•
Does not follow guidelines and instructions
•
Is confused by complexity
•
Accepts data at face value (or uses only one source of information)
•
Stays at a superficial level (without understanding the essence)
•
Makes incorrect priority judgments (the easy tasks over the important tasks)
•
Focuses on a single option
•
Fails to convey the key points of arguments
•
Comes up with conventional ideas (i.e., predictable)
•
Makes impractical or not workable suggestions
•
Fails to set realistic deadlines and milestones
•
Presents irrelevant or too detailed information
•
Writes in a confusing way with inconsistent arguments
•
Fails to address key issues
•
Writes for the wrong audience
•
Makes many spelling or grammatical errors
What a case study assignment looks like
EPSO has consistently referred to the new competition format as being a “written test
(case study)”. So what exactly does a case study typically involve?
In a case study you are presented with a series of documents, including the assign-
ment. The assignment defines the purpose of the exercise, your role, the time allowed
and the questions you are asked to solve.
All assignments have the same basic typical elements:

THE WRITTEN TEST
385
• You are asked to assume you have a particular role, for example with a specific job
title within a Unit.
• You are given documentation such as emails, reports from newspapers or briefing
documents by stakeholders, official documents, etc
• You have an assignment to recommend a course of action in dealing with a particu-
lar issue
• You are expected to base what you say primarily on the documentation provided
• In addition to your general competencies, the case study is used to assess your abil-
ity to apply specific knowledge to a particular situation in your field
• You are asked to answer specific questions arising from the documentation
Structuring your essay
A good basic structure to a case study might look like this:
INTRODUCTION
TITLE OF YOUR ANSWER TO QUESTION 1
TITLE OF YOUR ANSWER TO QUESTION 2
TITLE OF YOUR ANSWER TO QUESTION 3
CONCLUSIONS
When putting this structure “on paper” (in the on-screen editor) leave some blank
lines in between the titles. Don’t worry about what you are going to write at this point,
you will “fill in the blanks” later. It is a good idea to write your titles in ALL CAPITAL
LETTERS, and even number them, just to make sure that the structure of your text is vis-
ible at first glance. You could also leave a blank line between the titles and the actual por-
tions of text, to make the structure even more visible.
Why is this a good structure? Well, because the markers will undoubtedly be looking
for the structure and try to find out if you have answered all the questions. In fact, they
will probably go through your essay in a “speed reading” way (at least in a first reading).
You can help them with this by using this structure.
The INTRODUCTION and the CONCLUSIONS are there to make your essay com-
plete. Even though not necessary, it will show the reader that you are delivering a com-
pleted work, and that you did not run out of time while writing it. This will be the case
even if you write a compelling introduction and a well-thought conclusion.
For the “body” of your chapters it is advised to use bulleted lists (with − or * signs)
wherever possible. This will help your key points stand out and the markers to check
that you have not missed anything important. Do not confuse “lists” with enumerations
of incomplete sentences or mere keywords. Try to make concise but grammatically cor-
rect and comprehensive sentences. In other words, make your text fluent and readable.
Make your text ready for presentation. Imagine that you will use it as a handout for
an oral presentation you will give to an audience.
You will be taking the test on your own computer, using the application provided by
EPSO’s contractor for remote testing. Previous practice has been to provide a simple text
editor (comparable to Microsoft’s Notepad or Mac’s Notes) with very limited possibili-

386
THE WRITTEN TEST
ties to enhance the visual aspect of work. The only tools available have been capitaliza-
tion, numbering, lists, blank lines (no bold, italic or underlined text).
One point: never put your name on the documents. This will result in your exclusion
from the competition as all papers are marked anonymously.
Finally, in any written paper it is essential that you complete your answer and use the
available time properly. There is no point writing a superb first half of an answer and
then running out of time. Typically candidates have had 90 minutes for the EPSO case
study, but some competitions have allowed 60 minutes and others 120, so make sure you
know exactly how long you have got and plan your answer accordingly.
The content of your essay
Follow these guidelines in writing your essay:
• Accept the context: do not challenge the information as described in the documen-
tation and make sure to stay within this context. So, if your case study is about CO2
emissions of cars in the EU you should not start talking about greenhouse gases that
are emitted by households or industrial activity worldwide. This does not, however,
mean that in your solutions or recommendations you cannot suggest anything that
puts things in a wider perspective.
• Accept the data: the positions of the various stakeholders, the facts and the figures
as presented in the background information may not correspond to the full picture
as you understand it. Even if you know “the full story” you should mainly rely on
what’s in the documentation to build your arguments. However, when there is
information missing or incomplete you can add information of your own. In fact, in
doing so, you demonstrate your knowledge in the field. But be conscious that what-
ever you do in straying from what is literally in the documentation has to be judi-
cious and measured. For example, you might say “A 2023 report by X public interest
group suggested that the beneficial impact of measure Y on pollution would be min-
imal relative to the subsidies sought by stakeholder Z”. You cannot say that “in real-
ity, the motivation of stakeholder Z is simply to maximise their profits and what
they say in their paper is a tissue of lies”. Likewise, you might say that “It may be
noted that a  previous similar Commission proposal failed to achieve a qualified
majority in the Council owing to the opposition of countries with major affected
industries”. You should not say “it is a complete waste of time doing this because it
will never get past the vested national interests in the Council”.
• Stay focused on the case study: do not get sidetracked into talking about the wider
outside-world situation unless asked to do so (e.g., if the case study concerns the
new mobile phone transmission standards, keep the mention of global telecommu-
nication trends to the minimum). This is a particular risk where the topic of the case
study is in an area where you have particularly strong views. You are providing a
balanced and reasoned assessment for the specific questions asked, not writing a
manifesto.
• Dealing with limited information: you may not have all the information you need
in the documentation provided. You are usually safe to make reasonable assump-
tions but make it clear when you are doing so and where further information would
be desirable (“It can reasonably be assumed from the file that…” as opposed to “It
is known that…”).

• Focus on the core questions: it happens frequently that, somewhere in the back-
ground documents, somebody asks for something more – or something else – than
what is asked for in the assignment. This is a trap! Do not answer this as a separate
question, but maybe put some hints either in your introduction or in the conclu-
sions.
• Use the right sources: sometimes, the background documentation is “enriched”
with information coming from less reliable sources. A typical example could be a
report that has been published by an interest group or a lobbyist. This does not
mean that this information is not relevant or is wrong, but it is safest to give it less
weight than what is said by “official” or non-partisan sources (institutions, govern-
ments, scientists, etc). You may find some interesting ideas for your solutions or rec-
ommendations though.
• Strike a balance between detail and conciseness: a succinct description will make
your arguments clearer to the marker.
• Reference facts from the file: when making a claim or underlining an issue, make
sure to refer to the facts in the background documents. Do not make statements or
claims in a vacuum without supporting evidence.
• Your opinion matters: as a collaborator who is asked to produce a report for your
hierarchy, your opinion matters. It is by bringing your personal assessment of the
situation that you show that you have the depth and breadth of knowledge in the
field. Especially when your opinion is deviating from the trodden paths you should
argue it with strong and verifiable evidence, using facts instead of assumptions. If
one of the questions refers to “your opinion”, make sure you state a position on the
issue and do not just regurgitate facts or information from the documents. Be cau-
tious, however, about adopting positions that go flat out against EU policy or cur-
rent political and economic realities. You have to think like an EU official not a
student debater. Moreover, you are often asked to provide an “executive summary”,
which is different from a personal analysis.
• Make sure you understand the type of answer you are asked to provide and adapt
your style accordingly. For example, is it a briefing, a background note, a speaking
note, an argument for or against a certain approach? This should shape how you
structure your argument and how balanced or argumentative the analysis has to be.
Try also to use SMART solutions and recommendations. No good is served by
making vague statements having no quantifiable elements in terms of outcome or
timing. Ideally one can also measure and monitor the progress of time-bound objectives.
SMART is a mnemonic for the 5 steps of specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and
time-framed goals.
• Specific – For example, “this is expected to create a lot of jobs” is not specific. In con-
trast, “According to projections by the Economics Ministry, this will lead to a 15%
increase in employment in the target industry within 3 years” is specific.
• Measurable – A goal without a measurable outcome is like a sports competition
without a scoreboard or scorekeeper. A measurable goal keeps you focused on the
targeted results you want to attain. Saying that “if we pass this legislation, we will
cut CO2 emissions each year” is not measurable but adding figures to it and methods
how this can be measured will fill this gap.
• Achievable and Realistic – Saying that the EU will double its economic output in 5
years is ambitious, but unfortunately not realistic or achievable.
• Time-Framed – Goals and objectives just don’t get done when there's no time frame
THE WRITTEN TEST
387

388
THE WRITTEN TEST
tied to the goal-setting process. You must choose a time frame to accomplish your
goal. For example, saying that the legislation must be passed as soon as possible is
not as good as saying it has to be passed within 3 months.
Recommend solutions that encourage buy-in by stakeholders: usually, there are dif-
ferent stakeholders with very distinct positions and arguments. Very few “real life” sit-
uations have simple and obvious solutions. Don’t let yourself be confused by the
complexity of the file but instead try to find a good compromise, a compromise that mar-
ries up as far as possible the interests of all stakeholders but without jeopardising your
fundamental objective.
When using abbreviations for concepts, names or institutions referenced in the dossier,
make sure you know exactly what they refer to and include a short legend or key to avoid
misunderstandings. It is good communication practice to write out the abbreviations the
first time you use them, even if the background document lists them, since your essay
must be self-contained and not requiring the reader to refer to other documents. Of course,
exercise some healthy discretion: if it’s really a long abbreviation or very obvious, e.g.,
“EU”, it would not need to be spelled out.
A useful tip: you may find one or two press articles (extracts from newspapers, mag-
azines or news sites) in the documentation. It is a good idea to have a look at these first.
Why? Because (good) journalists are very good at summarising a situation and inform
their public in layman’s terms. You may in fact find all the answers to the questions right
there. All it takes then is to reformat the information and make it stick to the assignment
of your case study.
Scoring Guide
Here we look at what is likely to be scored in your Written Test in relation to the gen-
eral competencies which EPSO has said may be assessed in this test.
Critical thinking, analysing and creative problem solving
– Did the candidate provide a comprehensive presentation of the political, legal, eco-
nomic, financial, technical or scientific issues?
– Did the candidate provide specific legal or technical references? (Research data, case
law, legislative instruments, relevant historical comparisons, etc.)
– Did the candidate demonstrate an in-depth understanding of the background docu-
ments by providing examples, facts, names, data or other information?
– Did the candidate use their knowledge to interpret the charts, statistics, financial
and economic data correctly?
– Did the candidate demonstrate a thorough understanding of the cross-references
and draw the right conclusions from them?
Communication
For this competency, the following would be indicators of a positive response:

– Writes clearly, precisely and fluently. Arguments consistent throughout. Response
is well structured (e.g. sets out response under headings, includes summary at end).
– Uses the correct balance of detail and conciseness (e.g. paraphrases information in
the brief rather than simply repeating it).
– Avoids jargon (or explains it if used).
– Communicates in a manner that captures attention and interest (e.g. poses rhetorical
questions, writes in a lively but not “chatty” style).
– Can identify and convey the key points of an argument. Uses professional, relevant
and high quality ideas to back up arguments (e.g. the key points are stressed in an
introduction and then again in the conclusion).
– Tailors writing style so that it is appropriate to target audience (e.g. explains jargon,
but not in a patronising manner; understands the priorities and perspective of the
target audience and adapts the message accordingly).
– Uses an appropriate document format (email, note to the file, letter, press release).
The following would be indicators of a poor response:
– Writes unclearly, imprecisely or in a disjointed manner. Arguments are inconsistent.
– Answers are poorly structured (e.g. read like a stream of consciousness, making
them hard to follow. Recommendations contradict themselves at times).
– Is either overly detailed or overly brief (e.g. repeats large chunks of the background
brief verbatim, or alternatively makes minimal or incomplete reference).
– Uses jargon without explanation.
– Communicates in a manner that is dull, flat or uninteresting to read (e.g. simply lists
facts in bullet point form throughout).
– Fails to identify or convey the key points of an argument (e.g. writes as if all aspects
equally important).
– Adopts a writing style that is inappropriate to the target audience (e.g. too informal
or colloquial).
– Uses no formatting, just plain text.
Decision-making and getting results
– Did the candidate answer all aspects of the questions?
– Did the candidate consider the wider EU context of the issues? (Considering an
overall EU approach instead of national or regional one; implications for various
Member States and neighbouring countries, long-term effects of a policy or initiative
etc.).
– Did the candidate mention international examples, current events, place the information
in a global context? (Linking current affairs to the facts of the file; mentioning interna-
tional organisations’ perspectives; diplomatic efforts, political events etc.).
– Did the candidate demonstrate a solid understanding of the field? (Confident use of
terminology, concepts, ideas; reference to key players in the field etc.).
– Did the candidate refer to important facts, legislation, research or other information
THE WRITTEN TEST
389

demonstrating their familiarity with the topic? (Mention of publications, public
events, industry best practices and policies etc.).
– Did the candidate use their knowledge to interpret the charts, statistics, financial
and economic data correctly?
– Did the candidate demonstrate a thorough understanding of the cross-references
and draw the right conclusions from them?
Intrapreneurship
Let us remind ourselves of the “anchors”, the observable behaviours, for
Intrapreneurship:
● Demonstrates initiative, removes barriers and thinks ahead
● Takes on new challenges and initiates change, takes the lead when required
● Inspires and encourages others to take action and move ahead
● Guides and empowers others in order to grow and better their performance
● Acts as a role model and an ambassador for the department
It is immediately apparent that many of these behaviours are very much related to
dynamic group working situations involving interaction with other people. While they
could have been observed in the now-abolished Assessment Centre in tests such as the
group exercise, they are clearly extremely difficult for a candidate to demonstrate in the
format of a written paper.
Nonetheless, aspects of this competency that might be reflected to some degree in a
written paper include how the candidate plans to engage with stakeholders (internal and
external) to encourage engagement, compromise and buy-in to their proposed solution.
For example:
Did the candidate show imagination and creativity in their solutions?
Did they think of ways to carry others along and create a positive outcome rather
than just imposing a solution?
Did the candidate find solutions that would show the EU administration in a posi-
tive light, i.e. as creative problem-solvers looking to create win/win situations for
the widest benefit, rather than just trying to enforce rules?
Were internal stakeholders brought in to finding the best outcome in a way where
they felt engaged and motivated to achieve a success?
Was the solution realistic in terms of the burdens and pressures put on stakeholders,
or was it likely to lead to longer-term resentments and failure?
Had the candidate thought through the long-term implications of their proposal or
were there elements that might look good at first, but longer term would merely
create more problems?
Did the candidate propose a solution in which they would remain hands-on rather
than just dumping everything on others and walking away?

The written test, in the form of a case study, is an important part of the reformed selec-
tion process. Focusing on the above advice, including timekeeping, formating, clear
writing and succinct yet comprehensive analysis will help you get the best possible
score.
390
THE WRITTEN TEST